Welcome Page
You are at the last place you wanted to be: the doctor's office. You have not been feeling so great for the past few days and want to get a check-up. The front desk calls you in and the doctor asks a million questions that seem to come out of nowhere and are a little bit uncomfortable. The doctor takes out this weird device and looks into your ear, and then says you need to get blood work to check the levels of something you’ve never heard of. You walk out confused, not knowing what happened during the visit. Sound familiar? 
WhyDoctorsAsk is here to help explain why doctors ask the questions, do the exams, and order the tests that they do. We believe that the simplest way for all of us to be healthy and to receive the best healthcare is through open and honest conversations between doctors and their patients. We want to help everyone understand why doctors do the things they do by explaining the interview, the physical exam, common lab tests, common imaging tools, common vaccines, and common words used in medicine. We will also talk about questions to ask your doctor and common recommendations doctors make. Click below to learn more about why docs do what they do:
Welcome Page

Site Pages
Questions Doctors Ask
The Beginning (History of Present Illness)
Past Medical History
Family History
Social History
Substance Use History
Sexual History
The Symptoms (Review of Symptoms)
Physical Exam 
General
Vitals
Head, Eyes, Ears, Neck, Throat
Chest and Back
Belly
Genitals, Bladder, and Butt (Genitourinary)
Muscles, Bones, Ligaments, Tendons, and Movement (Musculoskeletal)
Brain and Nerves (Neurology)
Common Labs
Common Screening Tests
Common Imaging Tools
Intro to Imaging
Imaging Tools
Common Vaccines
Intro to vaccines
Childhood vaccines
Adult Vaccines
Travel Vaccines
Common Recommendations Doctors Make
Questions to Ask your Doctor
Common Medical words
Common Health Conditions
Germs
Electrocytes
The -itis
Types of Doctors
Other Healthcare Providers
Vitals
Healthcare Settings
Tools Used in the Physical Exam
Anonymous Questions Submission
Map of Clinics/Hospitals nearby
Suggestions/Comments/Contact us
About page 
Site Pages

Questions your doctors ask
You are in the room talking with the doctor, who seems to be talking a mile a minute. After you tell the doctor why you are there, you are asked about your family, alcohol use, smoking habits, and sexual activity.  All you came in for was some leg pain- how do all these other questions relate to what’s bothering you? Although it may seem out of nowhere, everything your doctor asks has a reason everything doctors ask is important and here is why
The Beginning (History of Present Illness or HPI)
This is what doctors call what you are coming to see the doctor for today
What brings you to the office today?
Most doctors will open their interviews with a question similar to this. It lets you tell your doctor what is going on with you. Always feel free to share anything that is bothering you. Some doctors call this the chief complaint, or the reason you wanted to see a doctor.
Anything else?
This is a doctor's favorite phrase. It is a way that doctors can get more information in case you remember something else you want to talk about. The whole picture is always important when it comes to your health.
When did it start?
This is known as the onset. By telling doctors when you started feeling bad, doctors can begin to think of possible illnesses that could be the cause. Certain illnesses can cause pain or discomfort at very specific times, like right when you wake up or in the middle of the night. You can also have problems develop when you start getting stressed out. Knowing the onset (and the things happening with it) can be very helpful. 
Where is the pain or problem?
Location, Location, Location. It is very important to know where the pain or discomfort is. It helps doctors know what body functions and anatomy to focus on in both their differential diagnosis and during the physical exam.
How long has this pain or problem been going on? 
This is known as the duration. It helps physicians categorize your symptoms. Different symptoms have different timelines, usually categorized as a short timeline (Acute), a medium timeline (Sub-Acute) and a long timeline (Chronic). Each of these timelines can help doctors with their differential diagnosis (a list of what doctors are thinking is happening) to determine what is happening to you. Short or long durations can point to very different health conditions. 
Can you describe the pain or problem? 
Doctors call this the characteristics. Describing how your body feels helps doctors determine what could possibly be going on. Different characteristics can lead to different diagnoses. For example, migraines are known to have a pulsating pain, while tension headaches feel “band-like.”
Can you rate the pain? 
Most doctors ask on a scale of 1-10, how much pain you are in. Ranking something as low pain does not mean that the doctor will not care about your problem as much. Instead, the scale is used to help doctors determine their priorities on their differential diagnosis. 
Has the pain or problem stayed in one place?
Has the pain or problem moved to anywhere else on your body? Doctors call this radiation. This helps doctors think about different processes that can cause pain or problems to move from one place to another.
How often does this pain or problem happen? 
This is what doctors call the frequency. It helps doctors sort their differential hypothesis by things that are constant or ones that come and go.
Does anything make it better? 
This seems like a silly question. You might wonder, “if I knew how to make it better, why would I be here?” This question however, helps doctors think of treatments that may act in a similar way. Certain diseases also characteristically get better with rest in a quiet room or with use of over the counter medicine. 
Does anything make it worse? 
Doctors use this to categorize their differential diagnosis. Things that make you feel worse usually have a reason behind them, and doctors use this to determine their diagnosis and treatment plan.
Have you been having any other signs or symptoms?
Doctors love to get all the information they can. Knowing all of the symptoms can help doctors get the full picture and make their differential diagnosis.
Have you ever had these symptoms before? 
Your previous experiences with symptoms can help doctors figure out if it something from your past medical history that is causing your symptoms. For example Asthma can reoccur later in life, and letting your doctor know you had asthma attacks when you were younger can point the doctor to the right differential diagnosis.
Was something major going on in your life when your symptoms began? 
This question lets doctors know a potential trigger and can help with the differential diagnosis. Doctors do not share anything with the outside world. The examination room is always a safe place to share information. Sharing information with your doctor is the best way for the doctor get all the information needed to help you feel better.
How has this affected your life? 
Doctors ask this to know how the problem is affecting your life. A doctor's goal is to help you feel better and to get back to your normal state.
What does this mean to you?
A patient and a doctor are going to think different symptoms mean totally different things. Doctors want to hear what you think is the cause or what is happening with your body so they can address it when they have figured out your diagnosis. A diagnosis is not going to be helpful if the doctor does not explain what it means and if the patient does not understand what is going on. 
What worries you about this problem? 
We all get scared and have fears about what is going on with our bodies when we aren’t feeling great. Doctors want to hear what worries you about the problem because their goal is to help put you at ease and help you feel better!
END
SECTION START
Past Medical History or PMH - This is when your doctor asks about your past health history, which includes things like surgery history and any allergies you have.
Do you have any medical conditions?
Telling your doctor all of your past conditions can help your doctor determine if they are related to what is happening at the time you come to the office.
Have you had any surgeries? 
Past surgeries help doctors determine if one of your previous surgeries could be playing a role in what you are seeing the doctor for. Past surgeries may also clue the doctor into some of your past medical conditions. They can use this in their differential diagnosis.
OB/GYN - At every new visit your doctor will ask you (female) about your menstrual cycle, past pregnancies, and menopause. These questions include:
When was your last period? 
This lets doctors know if your last period was within a normal timeframe. Depending on the timeline, they might want to do a pregnancy test or check iron levels. Pregnancy is not the only reason for you to miss your period, although that is the most common association to missed periods. 
Are your periods regular? 
This question may cause your doctor to ask more questions describing your periods and may ask for you to follow up with an OB/GYN specialist.
Have you been pregnant before? 
This gives doctors a picture of your whole health because pregnancy does cause changes to the body even after you give birth.
If you are in menopause, how are your symptoms? 
This can tell doctors if the symptoms you are experiencing at your visit are related to the menopause process. Doctors care about all of these because it gives the whole picture of your health.
Have you ever been diagnosed with any mental health problems? 
Mental health is incredibly important. The examination room is always a safe place to share information. Sharing information with your doctor is the best way for the doctor get all the information so they can get whole picture of your past medical history.
Have you ever been injured? 
Doctors ask this in order to get a picture of your whole health. Injuries such as car accidents can leave long-lasting impacts on your health and telling your doctor can help their differential diagnosis to see if your injury could be related to what you are coming in for.
How often do you see your Primary Care Physician (PCP)? 
Doctors ask this to know if you are checking in with a doctor about your health on a regular basis, including for annual physicals. Seeing your PCP on a regular basis can help catch diseases early, especially for diseases like cancer where catching the disease early can save your life. 
Are you up to date on your immunizations? 
This includes childhood vaccines, as well as the flu shot. If a doctor suspects an infection, knowing which vaccines you have gotten can help the doctor narrow down which germ is most likely the cause.
Do you wear your seatbelt/text when you drive/ is there a smoke alarm/carbon monoxide detector in your house? 
These are known as health maintenance questions to know if you are taking steps to prevent injuries. 
Do you wear sunscreen outside? 
Sunscreen is one of the best ways to prevent sunburn and skin cancer. Doctors ask this to know if they need to look during the physical exam for any marks on your body (even if you say yes, they will still do a general look-over of your skin). 
Have you had a Pap smear or a Mammogram (females)? 
Pap smears are a screening tool to check for cervical cancer and Mammograms are used to screen for breast cancers. Pap smear screening tests start around the age of 21 and should be done every three years and mammograms should start after the age of 40 and should be done once a year. If you have a family history of either cervical or breast cancer it is important to talk to your doctor about doing these screening tests earlier. This is also where finding out about family history of cancer becomes important. (Link it to mammo/pap in common screening tests i.e to learn more about pap/mammo click here)
Do you have any allergies? 
This also includes allergic reactions to any medications you have used in the past. If you are allergic to a drug, the doctor will prescribe you something that will not cause an allergic reaction.
Do you take any medication, including over the counter medications? 
This is so doctors can know if any of the medications they will prescribe to you will interact with any of your medications. Your symptoms can also be related to side effects of a medication you are taking. 
Do you take any vitamins?
 Doctors ask this because there are some medical conditions that are related to vitamin and mineral deficiencies and can use this question to rule those out.
Do you take any herbal supplements?
Doctors ask this to know everything that you are taking and if it is having any impact on what you are seeing the doctor for.
SECTION END

SECTION START
Family History or FHx - Doesn’t it seem weird for your doctor to ask about your family when you are the one in the office? There is a really important reason why doctors ask about your family: if someone in your immediate family [parent or sibling] has diseases such as diabetes, coronary heart disease, and cancer, it can increase your risk of having these diseases. It means that you are genetically more likely to also get certain diseases as well. This can raise a doctor’s suspicion to order certain tests to determine what is causing your symptoms.
Can you tell me about your parents?
 Doctors will ask about medical conditions that your parents had. They look for events that occurred early such as having a heart attack at a young age. This is so doctors can evaluate your risk for certain diseases based on what your family has had in the past.
Can you tell me about your siblings?
 Doctors ask about your siblings because your DNA is closely related. Diseases that your siblings have may indicate to your doctor that you are at a higher risk of developing that disease. Your doctor will most like order certain tests and tell you about prevention strategies.
Can you tell me about your children if you have any?
 Doctors ask this to get the full picture of your family.
Can you tell me about your grandparents? 
Doctors will ask about medical conditions that your grandparents had. They look for events that occurred early such as having a heart attack at a young age. This is so doctors can evaluate your risk for certain diseases based on what your family has had in the past.
Doctors use family history to determine risks; however your risk does not mean you will get the disease. It just means your doctor may want you to check in more and might give prevention strategies to prevent you from getting the disease, if it is preventable.

Social History or SHx - Now all of a sudden your doctor switches from asking about your family to asking about your daily life. You may be thinking, “how does this have anything to do with my health?” Your social health is very important in the differential diagnosis. The social history helps the physician take into account your environment and the things going on in your life into their differential diagnosis.
Can you take me through a normal day?
Doctors ask this for information about your normal day to day activities. This can help doctors understand how what you are coming in for is affecting you.
Who do you live with? 
Doctors ask this to get a picture of your direct support system.
How are things at home?
Doctors ask this to know if there is increased stress at home that could affect your health. The doctor's office is a safe place to share information and if domestic violence is occuring in your home your doctor can help.
Do you have anyone to rely on?
Doctors ask this to get a picture of your support system.
How have your friends and family responded to your illness?
Doctors ask this to gauge if the symptoms you are feeling are visible to your support group because this can point to the symptoms impacting your life more.
Where do you work? 
Doctors care about your work! Doctors are looking for physical, chemical, and emotional work hazards, since they could relate to the diagnosis. Alternatively, if you don’t work, you might be extra stressed or relaxed. 
How is work? 
Doctors use this to find out your stress levels at work.
Do you have any sick contacts?
Doctors ask this to know if there are people around you who have an infection. This may make certain infections higher on the doctor’s differential diagnosis.
Have you traveled recently?
Doctors ask this to know if you gone to an area where other infections are more common. This may make certain infections higher on the doctor’s differential diagnosis.
Exercise
How often do you exercise?
How long do you exercise for?
What type of exercise?
Doctors ask about exercise because it is important for your physical health. Exercise is one of the best ways to prevent getting sick. It helps keep your muscles working (can burn calories even at rest!) and can even help your brain function better. Exercise can include weight-lifting, jogging, sprinting, swimming, and even something as simple as walking the long route to the cafeteria for lunch. It’s tough to fit exercise into our busy lives, so try to make small adjustments that can lead you to exercising a little more each day.
How is your diet?
Your diet is so important to your health. Doctors want to know if you are getting the sugar, protein, fat,  vitamins, salt, and minerals you need each day. Missing too much of one thing or having too much of another thing can have a large effect on your health. Ask your doctor about your diet and if you are giving your body everything you need. Dieting can be scary and not all the diets floating around on the internet are safe. Your doctor can help you get started in the right direction, or refer you to a dietician or nutritionist.  One of the best ways to start a safer diet is make small changes. For example, if you drink 2 glasses of soda a day, try cutting it down to 1 a day.
Do you have any financial concerns?
It sounds a little weird for your doctor (the one you’re paying right now for the visit) to ask about your finances. There is a reason though! Depending on your concerns, your doctor will work with you to prescribe medications that can fit your budget but still be effective. Your doctor may also share with you other resources to help pay for medication, and health insurance.
How would you rate your stress? 
Stress can have huge impacts on your health. Stress can throw your whole body out of whack and a doctor asks about stress levels to determine if it is affecting your symptoms.
Have you had any recent significant life events?
Doctors ask this to find out if these events are having any impact on your health and if this could be affecting the symptoms you are coming in for.
How would you describe your mood?  
Your mental health is important! Share with your doctor how you have been feeling. It can help your doctor know if this is affecting your health.
Have you had any anxiety?
You may feel anxious just being in the doctor's office, but your doctor wants to know so that they can give you either the resources or medications to help prevent your anxiety.
Have you felt depressed? 
Depression is a serious matter and you should tell your doctor how your mood has been. Your doctor can give you the resources or medications to help you through your depression. Your doctor may also ask some other questions that include:
How is your sleep?
Depression can cause sleep problems.
What are you interested in? 
Depression leads to decreased interest.
Do you feel guilty about anything?
Depression can make you feel more guilty than you normally would.
How is your energy level?
Depression can decrease your energy level.
How has your concentration been lately? 
Depression can make it harder to concentrate
How is your appetite?
Depression can decrease your appetite.
Have you felt suicidal?
Suicide is on the rise in United States, and it is believed that 50% of people who commit suicide visit their doctor 4 weeks before. Doctors ask this in order to give you resources to help you. If you or a loved one are feeling suicidal call the suicide hotline at 1-800-273-8255.
Have you ever had any physical or sexual abuse? 
Your doctor’s office is a safe place to share information like this. Your doctor does not share this with anyone and only uses this to give you the best care they can.

Substance Use History - Doctors can ask about some sensitive subjects, and your smoking history, drinking history or use of illicit drugs can be very sensitive subjects. Doctors ask these questions to every patient, they do not share the information with others, and especially not with law enforcement. Doctors do not judge you when it comes to substance use. Different substances can have direct impacts on your health and doctors use this in their differential diagnosis.
Cigarettes
Do you currently smoke?
How many cigarettes do you smoke a day?
Have you ever smoked?
How many cigarettes a day did you smoke?
How many years have you smoked for? 
Doctors are asking this to get a number which is called pack-years (a measurement for determining how much you have smoked). Smoking can impact your health in many ways from coughing to lung disease to high blood pressure.
Have you thought about smoking cessation? 
Quitting smoking is one of the best things you can do to increase your health. Just by having your doctor ask you if you would want to quit smoking actually increases the chance that at some point in the future you will try to quit smoking. It is not easy to quit and your doctor will be with you throughout your journey to quitting and help you find what helps you quit or decrease the amount you smoke a day. 
Alcohol
Do you currently drink alcohol?
If you do drink, how much?
Could you describe your past drinking habits for me?
Doctors ask about alcohol use because alcohol use has direct effects on both your liver, heart, and brain. Your doctor is looking to see if this has an influence on the differential diagnosis.
Have you thought about alcohol cessation? 
Quitting alcohol is a great way to increase your health. Even if it is cutting down on the number of drinks you have, there can be big influences on your health. It is not easy to quit and your doctor will be with you throughout your journey to quitting.
Do you use any Illicit Drugs? 
Doctors do not share this with anyone, including law enforcement. The doctor's office is a safe place for you to share about your health. Your doctor is asking this because some drugs can cause a lot of long term symptoms that could have a negative influence on your health.

Sexual History - Doctors can ask about some sensitive subjects and sexual history might be the most sensitive. Doctors ask this of every patient because your sexual health is important. Doctors do not judge you and do not share your information with others (*HIV positive status by law is mandated for you to tell your sexual partners and if you refuse doctors do have the right to tell them). Doctors ask about your sexual history for two reasons. The first is the risk of sexually transmitted diseases, and the second involves sexual function [includes desire for sex, any pain, etc]. Sexually transmitted diseases can have widespread effects across the body that your doctor would want to take into account into their differential diagnosis. Your doctor is also able to answer any questions you have about sex or to help you find resources. 
Do you have a significant other? 
Your doctor asks you this to know if you have a partner and to know if you have a direct support group.
How are things with your significant other? 
Your doctor wants to know how your relationship is going to see if this is impacting your health
Are you currently sexually active?
Doctors ask this to know if a sexually transmitted disease should be in their differential diagnosis.
Do you, or have you ever had sex with males, females, or both?
Doctors ask this because there are different risk factors associated with male-female, male-male, or female-female relationships that they will account for in their differential diagnosis.
Do you use contraceptives (condoms, birth control)?
Contraceptives are a great way to prevent pregnancy and condoms are a great way in preventing some, but not all sexually transmitted diseases. Doctors ask this to know if you are reducing your risk for both pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases.
Any problems during sex? 
Doctors ask this because your sexual health can impact your mental health. By addressing any problems you are currently having with sex, they can help increase your mental health. Additionally, these problems can impact your sexual life, and addressing these issues can help you feel less social or physical discomfort. 
Are you interested in HIV testing? 
Current recommendations is that everyone should be tested for HIV at least once, so your doctor may ask you if you would want to be tested.
Functional Status - Doctors ask these questions when they think your symptoms might really be messing with your daily routine (Activities of Daily Living or ADLs) in order to evaluate how much the symptoms are impacting you. These questions are more commonly asked in the elderly because diseases like Alzheimer's can make even normal activities difficult. These questions may include:
How is your driving?
Can you bathe yourself?
Do you need help getting around the house?
Can you work?
Can you keep your finances in check?
Can you shop?
Can you cook?
Can you clean your house?
Can you dress yourself?

Review of systems/symptoms- your doctor might ask you a lot of questions after it seems like the questioning is almost done. They will go through questions, asking about what seems like anything and everything from head to toe. You might start getting annoyed because it seems like you are responding “no” to almost every question. Didn’t the doctor ask you enough about what you came in with to figure it out? Why is the doctor trying to fish for more seemingly useless information and wasting your time? 

Doctors like to use a review of systems to try to see if anything else might be wrong, even if it does not concern you enough to bring up to the doctor. For example, if you are having difficulty breathing with very little activity, you might not be too concerned about the slight tingling in your wrist or the itchiness in your eyes. Or it might not be something you thought of as abnormal- maybe the change is just because of aging? By going head to toe through all the body systems, the doctor can make sure no extra symptom is missed, whether it is related to your “chief complaint” or not. If you say yes to any of these questions, you will probably be asked follow-up questions similar to those in the HPI. The more information doctors get, the easier it is to figure out how to help you!

General
Any fatigue or difficulty sleeping?
Tiredness can play a role in many different diseases. Fatigue can be from things such as anemia or infections.
Any constant, chronic pain?
Doctors want to address any pain you are having so that they can help you feel better.
Any general feelings of feeling unwell?
Doctors want to address any feelings of being unwell so they can help you feel better.
Any fevers?
This can mean that you have a possible infection that the doctor will want to investigate further.

Head and neck
Any chronic (long term) pain in your head or neck?
Doctors want to know this so they know to focus on an area during the physical exam.
Any acute (short term) pain in your head or neck? 
This can indicate something simple like a muscle cramp, or something more serious, like infection and inflammation
Any noticeable masses? 
Doctors like to make sure they don’t miss anything important, like new masses showing up
Any changes in hearing?
Hearing changes can be because of damage to the little hairs deep inside your ears that help conduct sound, wax, an issue with a neural pathway, infection, and much more! Some causes are normal, like with aging, and some can be worrisome
Any pain in your ear or discharge (liquid/pus coming out of the ear)?
This question relates to any injury or infection in the ear
Any nasal dripping, stuffiness, or post nasal drip?
Post nasal drip, or mucus dripping down to your throat while you sleep, is actually one of the most common causes for long term cough! These pesky changes can point to an infection or just allergies.
Any changes in your voice?
While there can be simple causes to changes in voice (like yelling at a concert), damage to or compression of certain nerves can cause changes to your voice
Any toothaches or sensitivity in your mouth?
Infection or dental issues can cause these problems.
Any sores or open wounds near or in your mouth?
These can be a sign of infection.

Brain and Nerves (Neurological) 
Any sudden changes in levels of consciousness?
This is an especially important and concerning finding. Even though you might be fine while at the doctor’s office, if you had a change in your level of consciousness (ex: you had recent fainting spells), this is something your doctor would want to find out the cause for. 
Any recent seizures?
This can be a sign of overactivity in the brain. One seizure is not very concerning, but is important to monitor/keep track of. If they are happening repeatedly, the doctor can help you find ways to control them
Any numbness?
Numbness can indicate nerve problems.
Any weakness?
Sudden change in muscle tone, especially on one side, can imply a few causes, and it is important to know about weakness to rule out the more serious causes
Any dizziness/balance issues?
This might seem weird, but balance problems can actually be because of problems with your ear! The fluid in your ear helps you know what direction you are turning in and can help your body adjust to head movement. If the levels are off, you might start feeling dizzy. 
Problems with certain nerve pathways can also cause dizziness, so this is one of the things doctors like to rule out! 
Any headaches?
There are a lot of causes for headaches and a lot of different types! This is another one where doctors like to rule out the most serious causes if you have this symptom.

Vision
Any change in vision?
You might need a new eye glasses prescription or there might be a problem in one of the pathways your visual system uses to help you see and understand what you are seeing
Any blurriness or double vision?
These can point to either a problem with your eyes, muscles around your eyes, or in the brain. Doctors will want to look more into this during your physical exam and may recommend imaging or other tests. 
Any pain in your eyes?
Pain can point to a variety of things including an object getting in your eye, headaches, and infection.
Any redness in your eyes?
Redness can be because of allergies, infection, or tiny vessels in your eyes bleeding (although much less likely)
Any itchiness or discharge from your eyes?
This is usually because of allergies, but the doctor will probably want to make sure you don’t have conjunctivitis, more commonly known as Pink Eye! (This is an infection that can spread to other people and needs to be treated with certain drops)
Any difficulties reading?
Vision changes over time. Typically, as we age our reading vision declines, and your doctor may recommend getting reading glasses.

Heart and Blood Vessels (Cardiovascular) 
Any chest pain?
Chest pain is tricky. The major thing the doctor wants to rule out, and what you might be concerned about, is a heart attack. But there are different types of chest pain (burning, pressure, etc), and many different causes. It can be because of something simple like heartburn. Figuring out the cause is important. 
Any palpitations [heart racing]?
Palpitations can have many causes such as anxiety or mitral valve prolapse. Your doctor will want to pay attention to your heart during your physical exam or order a Holter monitor (a take-home EKG machine) to learn more about your palpitations.
Any swelling in your lower legs?
This is called peripheral edema and can point to different vascular processes including congestive heart failure (CHF). 
Any leg pain while walking around?
Leg pain while walking is called claudication (cramps!) and your doctor will want to look further into this. This can point to atherosclerosis (plaque build up in your arteries) and your doctor will want to give you medicines to prevent it from progressing any further. 
Any difficulty breathing lying down?
Breathing while lying down can help a doctor narrow the differential down to different heart conditions. Typically congestive heart failure causes problems with breathing at night.
How many pillows do you sleep with at night?
Doctors ask this because it relates to congestive heart failure. The more pillows you use, the more your doctor will want to get you started on treatment.
Have you been waking up at night because you can’t breathe?
This can happen if fluid is backing up from your heart to your lungs and is especially common in certain illnesses when you are lying flat on your back. It can also be because of sleep apnea, causing a person to snore. 

Lungs (Pulmonary)
Any difficulty breathing on exertion [with excess movement, like climbing stairs]?
Difficulty breathing when moving can point to many different things. Your doctor will want to listen to your chest to hear the sounds when you breathe (check out the physical exam to learn more about breath sounds). The different sounds or lack of sounds can point a doctor to a particular disease.
Any changes in your normal exercise ability?
A change in your normal exercise can be a sign of your lungs not working how they are supposed. Your doctor will want to investigate this further with the physical exam and possibly pulmonary function tests (PFTs).
Any coughing?
Coughing can point to many different things going on with your lungs. It can be a sign of infection, lung disease and cancer(much rarer than the rest).
Does anything come up or is it a dry cough?
Dry cough vs mucus coming out of your cough can point to different processes. Dry coughs can point to things such as asthma and post nasal drip, while a wet cough can be a sign of bronchitis or infection.
What color is it?
It may sound gross, but the color and consistency can point to different germs in your lungs.
How much is it?
Different diseases cause varying amounts of mucus to build up, which can help doctors on their differential diagnosis.
When does it start/stop?
The length of time of a cough can lead a doctor to different diagnoses depending if it has only been a few days vs a few months.
Any difficulty breathing at rest? 
This can point to something that could be more severe and your doctor will want to investigate.
Is it difficult to get air in, out, or both?
Some diseases make it harder to get air in (pulmonary fibrosis) while other diseases make it harder to blow air out of your lungs (COPD).
Any wheezing?
Wheezing can point to different lung diseases. Asthma commonly causes wheezing as well as some infections
Any snoring?
Snoring can point to something like sleep apnea or an obstructed airway. Sleep apnea can make you feel tired even though you are getting enough sleep. Depending on how much snoring and other factors you have, your doctor may order additional tests to check for sleep apnea.

Digestion (Gastrointestinal) 
Any feelings of heartburn?
People can experience varying sensations with heartburn, ranging from migrating pain in the chest to a sharp sensation to a burning sensation. Heartburn famously is associated with acid reflux. These different sensations can help doctors on their differential diagnosis. 
Any pain in your abdomen?
The abdomen is divided into four squares during the physical exam. Each square contains different organs. Sensitivity or pain  in specific squares can point to different diagnoses. Your doctor will focus on this area during the physical exam.
Any pain with or after swallowing?
Difficulty swallowing can be because of a problem with the nerves in your neck, your throat muscles, or your esophagus. Your doctor will check this further in the physical exam. 
Any nausea? 
Nausea can have many causes and your doctor will use what was learned during the interview and the physical exam to help address any nausea. 
Any Vomiting?
It may sound gross, but your vomit can be very informative.
How would you describe the consistency? 
The consistency can help a doctor know if it is caused by food poisoning, infection or another other G.I. problem,
Was there any blood?
Throwing up blood can be rather scary, and letting your doctor know it occurred is important because there could be a bleed somewhere along your G.I. tract, infection or other G.I. diseases.
How much?
The amount of vomit can point to different diseases.
How many times and for how long?
Doctors want to know this so they can know if this a new issue or something that has been going on for a while because it can change their diagnosis.
Any abdominal swelling?
Abdominal swelling can be caused by variety of causes from inflammation to malnutrition (not getting enough nutrients) that your doctor may order tests for.
Have you passed any gas?
It may be a little gross to talk about farting, but frequency and odor of farts can give your doctor a lot of information about your intestines, constipation, diet, medication side effects and infections.
Any loose stools [diarrhea]?
Diarrhea is a little gross, but it is a useful symptom for doctors to know of because it can help diagnose different disease processes.
Does your poop float?
Floating poop can mean you have too much fat in your poop. This can help doctors diagnose different disease processes.
Any difficulty pooping?
Nobody enjoys constipation. Constipation can be caused by a variety of things including blockage in your G.I. tract and not enough fiber in your diet. Your doctor will check your abdomen during the physical exam and may order tests to determine the cause.
Any changes in the color or consistency of stools?
Poop is something people usually don’t like to discuss, but the color and consistency can be used in diagnosing infections, malnutrition, and other G.I. or inflammatory diseases.

Genitals and Urination (Genito-urinary)
Any difficulty getting or maintaining an erection?
As men age, it can be difficult to maintain an erection. There are also other medical conditions that can cause this. Your doctor will be able to address this issue and work with you to help you.
Have you noticed any swelling or masses around your testicles?
Masses and swellings can point the doctor to investigate this during the physical exam to determine what the mass is.
Any growths or wounds on your penis?
Doctors want to know this because growths may be sign of infection and wounds can be a sign of trauma. Your doctor will want to look at the growths and wounds during the physical exam to diagnose their cause.
Any changes to arousal?
Changes in arousal can be related to medication, mental health, and other medical conditions that your doctor will want to address. 
Any pain or tenderness around breasts?
Pain or tenderness can point to trauma or possible growth in the breast. Your doctor will want to do a breast exam to diagnose the cause.
Any changes in shape of breasts or nipples?
Changes in shape of breasts or nipples can be caused by growths or trauma. Your doctor will want to do a breast exam to diagnose the cause.
Any hot flashes?
Hot flashes can be part of menopause. Your doctor will ask you multiple questions about your process through menopause, and will be a resource for you as go through menopause.
Any lubrication issues/vaginal dryness?
Excess lubrication or excess dryness may be due to a hormonal imbalance that your doctor will want to investigate further with a genital exam and possible blood work. 
Any difficulty urinating?
Difficulty urinating can be due to various kidney problems including kidney stones, a urinary tract infection, and other medical conditions in the kidney, bladder, and genitals. Your doctor may check your costophrenic angle during the physical exam for kidney stones, and may have you pee in a cup for a UTI.
Any discharge around your penis/vagina?
Abnormal amounts of discharge from the penis/vagina can point to an infection that your doctor will want to diagnose and treat.
Any cloudiness in urine?
Cloudiness in the urine can point to a kidney, bladder, or genital problem. Your doctor may have you pee in a cup to determine what is clouding up the urine.
Any pain while urinating? 
Pain while urinating can be due to bladder or genital problems. UTIs and kidney stones commonly cause pain while urinating. Your doctor may want you to pee in a cup and order other tests to determine what in the urine is causing the problem.
Do you have to get up in the middle of the night to urinate?
Nobody likes waking up and getting out of the warm, cozy bed to go to the bathroom. Peeing in the middle of the night can be due to many different causes including diabetes, enlarged prostate,and  infections.Your doctor will want to test your urine and possibly your blood to determine the cause.
Do you experience an inability to hold urine in?
Inability to hold your urine (incontinence) is something many people across the world have. Your doctor may be able to prescribe medications that could help with this, depending on the cause.
Do you have difficulty with starting to urinate or to completely empty?
Difficulty to start urinating or completely emptying can be related to an enlarged prostate, infection, kidney stones, and many other medical conditions. Your doctor will focus on this during the genitourinary part of the physical exam.

Related to Blood (Hematology) 
Any increased bruising?
Bruises can be scary to find. Bruises can be due to low platelet counts, or genetic diseases that makes your blood stick less together. Your doctor will want to run a blood test to find out the causes. 
Any difficulty stopping bleeding from small cuts?
Cuts that don’t stop bleeding can be due to low platelet counts, or genetic diseases that makes your blood stick together less. Your doctor will want to run a blood test to find out the causes. 

Muscles, bones, joints, tendons, ligaments, and movement (Musculoskeletal)
Any joint pain or swelling?
Long-term pain or swelling in your joints is commonly caused by arthritis, while more recent pain or swelling can be due to other causes. Your doctor will check this out during the physical exam.
Any pain with movement?
The area of the pain can point the doctor to which muscles and joints to focus on during the physical exam.
Any muscle aches or spasms?
Doctors will want to look at these areas during the physical exam to determine what is causing the spasm or muscle ache.
Any low back pain?
Your doctor will ask you more questions about when the pain started and where on the back your pain is. This will prompt your doctor to focus on the lower back during the physical exam,
Any shoulder pain?
Shoulder pain may be caused by an injured nerve, vessel or muscle and depending on where you tell the doctor the pain is (behind the shoulder, in front of the shoulder, etc)  can help your doctor diagnose what is happening.
Any pain or difficulty moving your shoulder?
Depending on where the difficulties in movement for your shoulder can help diagnose a deltoid injury, a rotator cuff injury, or bone injury. Move this to the shoulder pain question a few questions above
Any knee pain?
Knee pain is commonly one of the first joints to experience pain from many different medical conditions. Your doctor will want to focus on the knee(s) that are in pain during the physical exam and might run blood tests to determine the underlying medical condition.
Any difficulty moving/using hands?
Hands are one of the places rheumatoid arthritis loves to go to. Your doctor, during the physical exam, will focus on the hands and run blood tests and x-rays to determine the underlying medical conditions. 
Any pain at the hip?
Pain in the hip can be caused by tendonitis, muscle pain, or bone pain. Your doctor will test your range of motion during the physical exam to see which part of the hip the pain is coming from.

Skin and Hair
Any changes in hair growth/loss?
Hair growth and loss can be due to the natural process of aging or due to hormonal changes.
Any new growths on your skin?
Doctors will want to look at any of these growths to make sure they do not pose a risk to your health.
Any redness/rashes?
Rashes and redness can be due to allergic reactions, infections, cuts, and bruises, to name a few. Your doctor will want to look at the rash or redness to determine what it is.
Any wounds that won’t heal?
Wounds that won’t heal are at higher risk for infection and your doctor will want to address this. There can also be an underlying cause regarding why the wound isn’t healing. 
Any itching? 
Itching is typically caused by allergies, but depending on how bad the itching is, your doctor will focus on the itchy area during the physical exam.
Any changes in dryness of skin?
Dryness and cracking of the skin is commonly caused by eczema and psoriasis. Your doctor will look at the skin that is dry to determine what treatment your skin may need.
Any lines on fingernails/changes to fingernails?
Our nails change as we age, but they can also change due to nutrition, injury, and other underlying medical conditions.

Hormones (Endocrine)
Any feelings of being very cold or very warm?
Being unusually warm or cold can point your doctor to a thyroid problem, a problem with blood vessels (like Raynaud's) or other endocrine related problems. This is something your doctor would order blood tests for to help their diagnosis.
Any recent weight loss?
Unexpected weight loss can be due to lots of different things. It can be caused by Celiacs (allergic to gluten), some infections, cancer, and many other diagnoses. This is something your doctor would order blood tests for to help their diagnosis.
Did you plan to lose weight?
If you planned on losing weight and were able to, that’s great! Your doctor will be happy to hear that, and it will help your doctor know if the weight loss was expected or unexpected. Unexpected weight loss (aka no change in diet or exercise) can point towards certain medical conditions, which will help in the differential diagnosis.
Any increased urge to pee, eat, or increased thirst?
Increased peeing or thirst can be a sign of diabetes, hormonal imbalance, or one of the medications you are on (plus many other areas of the body can play a role). Increased appetite can be related to medications you may be taking or hormonal imbalance.
Any recent weight gain?
Weight gain can be caused by many different processes that can be from endocrine, inflammation, G.I, diet and exercise. This is something your doctor would order blood tests for to help their diagnosis.













Physical Exam - You just finished answering what felt like 100’s of questions and now the doctor says it's time to start the physical exam. Next thing you know, you feel the cold stethoscope on your back, and your doctor is asking you to take a deep breath in and out. The doctor inspects and lightly presses on your stomach for some odd reason. The doctor now asks you three silly questions about who you are, where you are, and what today's date is. Human bodies are complex and almost work like a machine- a problem in one inner mechanism can cause changes in a seemingly unrelated spot. This is why your doctor will go through such a detailed exam. Just like in the interview, everything your doctor does during the physical exam has a reason and here is what the doctor will do, and why:   source: Bates Guide to Physical Examination
Basic GP eventually maybe by speciality? <- longterm

Your doctor might not do all of these during the physical exam, depending on the nature of your visit, the index of suspicion for certain things, and a few other factors. This is a basic overview of a full physical exam. However, it is not necessary or even practical to always perform a full physical exam. 

Your general appearance
You might not realize it, but the physical exam actually starts the second the doctor walk into the room. How? The doctor usually starts by looking at your general appearance. Your doctor will be looking at:
Characteristics of skin
Doctors are looking for rashes, sweat, paleness, and skin discolorations.
Check your Ease of speaking
Can you speak in full sentences or do you have to pause in between words to catch your breath? 
These can lead a doctor to thinking of an underlying medical condition involving your lungs, throat, or brain based on how easily you’re speaking
Listen to your Speech: Is it clear or is it slurring?
Fast speech can indicate hyperthyroidism and slurring can indicate some serious conditions like low blood sugar, a stroke, or drowsiness because of medication
Look at your Posture 
Doctors are looking if you are favoring one side, sitting in a position that helps you breathe easier, and more. Each of these can be caused by an underlying medical condition.
Check your Hygiene
Hygiene is important for preventing infections. Lack of care of personal appearance can also indicate depression. 
Check your Awareness: do you know where you are, what day it is, and major events occurring? 
An impairment in awareness can help a doctor in the differential diagnosis.
Check Symmetry
Symmetry is important, because asymmetry can indicate a disease process affecting only one side. Many things will be assessed on one side, then the other for comparison. For example, the doctor will check the knee reflex on the left side, then the right, instead of checking all of the right leg reflexes first. This way, doctors can compare both sides, using the opposite side as a baseline. 

Vitals  
This is when your doctor takes your blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, and breathing rate. These are basic signs of your health and can help your doctor with differential diagnosis and problems abnormalities in these numbers can cause. Doctors will be doing the following during this part of the physical exam: 
Doctors will take your blood pressure
Your blood pressure is one of the most important measurements your doctor takes. There are two numbers in blood pressure. Systolic is the top number, which is the pressure in your arteries when your heart contracts. The diastolic is the bottom number, which is the pressure in your arteries when your heart is relaxing. You can think of blood pressure as a car tire. The more air you pump into the tire (blood your heart pumps into your blood vessels), the higher pressure in the tire is. High air pressure in your tire can cause damage to the tire, just like how high blood pressure in your arteries can cause damage to your arteries and heart.
This will be done with a cuff around your upper arm and a stethoscope. The cuff gets inflated and then slowly released while the doctor listens with a stethoscope. Using these 2 tools, the doctor can determine your blood pressure. High or low blood pressures can be troublesome, and the doctor might take more steps depending on the values. 
Take your pulse 
This is when your doctor counts your heart rate. The heart rate is another measurement that tells a lot about your health. A fast heart rate (Tachycardia) or a slow heart rate (bradycardia) can be related to different aspects of health. Your doctor may take your heart rate in multiple locations to see if it is the same on each side. The doctor will also be checking if the beat has a regular rate and is strong. 
Locations your doctor can take your pulse
Radial: wrist on the thumb side
Brachial: inner arm, above the elbow
Femoral: at the upper thigh, to the side of genitalia
The doctor should make sure you are properly draped at this point. They might have you bend your leg to make a four shape to better feel the femoral pulse. This is a strong pulse usually. Lymph nodes (if swollen or tender, they can indicate infection or blockage in the area) in the area can also be felt.
Popliteal; behind the knee
Dorsalis pedis: top of the foot
Posterior tibial: behind the inner ankle
The doctor will check pulses to make sure blood supply in all areas is good. The doctor will check for: quality, number, regularity 
Take your temperature
This is to see if you have a fever. A low fever or slight changes usually are not too concerning, but big changes require more investigation and possible hospitalization. 
Breathing rate
Different rates of breathing can point to different lung processes in the differential diagnosis
Height and Weight
Height and Weight are used to calculate your Body Mass Index (BMI).

Skin 
Your skin can tell your doctor a lot about your health. Doctors will be looking at the following in more detail than the “general appearance” part during this part of the physical exam:
Check the color of your skin
Flushing, paleness, and discolorations
This can let the doctor now more about your blood circulation or any problems in regulating your body temperature
Check for any swelling at the limbs
This can point to signs of inflammation
Look for Dry or very moist skin
This could be skin conditions like eczema or psoriasis or overactive sweat glands
Look for any Vascular and purpuric lesions (purplish or brownish bruising)
This involves looking for bruising and discoloration in small areas or large areas 
Check the Appearance of veins
For example, some people might have very noticeable veins on their legs
Look for any Lesions: 
Raised (level), loss of skin surface
Look for any Scars, shrinking/stretching, or thickening of skin
Check your Nails: 
Doctors are looking to see if your nails are flat, curved, or clubbed.
This can give information about vitamin deficiencies or circulation problems. Pressing on the nail and then releasing can be done to see how quickly the nail turns pink again. This tests blood flow. 
Splinter hemorrhages (splinter looking marks under the nails), raised lines, inflammation around nails
Head, Eyes, Ears, Neck, Throat (HEENT)  
Your head, eyes, ears, neck, and throat are typically where your doctor begins the physical exam. This is when your doctor will feel your scalp, shine a light in your eye, ask you to say ahhhh, and feel your throat. All of these give your doctor information about your body that can aid in the differential diagnosis.

Head  
Doctors check all over your body, and the head is no different. Your doctor is looking for bumps, redness, and tenderness. Here are some of the things your doctor will do during this part of the physical exam:
Might ask if you have noticed something different or wrong with your hair or scalp: can be hard for a doctor to notice immediately because of hair
Doctors will Inspect and palpate (feel) your head for:
Fine/coarse hair: can indicate thyroid issue
redness/scaling: indicates dandruff
Bigger skull
Bumps or lumps on head
Tenderness in an area
Doctors will look at your Face for:
Facial expression
Symmetry
Involuntary movement
Swelling [edema] or masses

Eyes 
You may not realize this, but your eyes can tell a doctor a lot about your health. Your doctor will be using some bright lights during this part of the physical exam. Here is what your doctor will do during this part of the physical exam:
Reading Letters and numbers off a chart
Why do you have to read letters off a chart? 
Doctors will check how your vision is, or if there are changes [if it is a doctor you have seen before]. A print card is used, with one eye covered at a time
Check your visual fields (visual fields are basically the four quarters of a circle)
This is to to see if you can see in all four directions with each eye
Doctor will have you cover an eye and will have you identify an object in your top left, top right, bottom left, and bottom right visual fields.
Ask you to move your eyelids
This is done to look at the tear duct and color of the eyelid, sclera (“white of your eyes”), and conjunctiva (pink membranes seen best from the inner surface of your lower eyelids)
Yellow sclera can indicate jaundice while pale conjunctiva can indicate anemia
Follow the doctor’s finger
Why do you have to follow things with your eyes?
Follow the H in space
The doctor might have you follow a finger or something else while creating a shape like an H. This is to make sure your eyes move in the right directions and to see if your eyes slightly beat if you look at something
Changes can be seen in many neurological conditions
Following a finger as it moves toward your nose
This check to make sure your eyes look in properly (as if you look cross eyed for a moment)
Hyperthyroidism can impact this
Your doctor will then shine a light in your eye
What is the point of the annoying light shining on your eyes?
General appearance: making sure everything looks normal
Reaction of pupils to light
Does your eye constrict when a light is shone on it (it should!)
Does the opposite eye constrict when a light is shone on the other eye (it should!)
Repeated on other side as well
Checking for a red reflex [what looks like red eye in pictures]
Why is the doctor coming very close to your face: 
Your doctor is using the ophthalmoscope (device with light) to look at your retina, optic disc, and blood vessels. These are internal structures that can be seen with a light and this magnification tool. Changes are specific for different conditions, like cataracts, hypertension, uncontrolled diabetes, and more! Doctors sometimes consider the eyes a window into the body! 

Ears 
The doctor finishes looking at your eyes, and now you feel a tug on your ears as your doctor is about to look into your ears. Here is what your doctor will be doing for this part:
Look for any changes, pain, inflammation, or discharge in your ears
Doctors will now look in your ear
What is going in my ear?
An otoscope (the tip is disposable and changed between patients)
Used to see if the inside of the ear is swollen, red, narrow, has wax or has foreign bodies
Can indicate infection
Wax buildup can cause difficulty hearing
Your doctor will make noises behind ears
Checking to make sure hearing is fine on both sides
Doctors will now use a metal looking rod
What is the metal looking rod?
Tuning fork which will be vibrating
Will be placed on forehead to see what side you hear a sound
On the bone behind your ear to see if you can hear sounds when it is on the bone and then in front of your ear
Both these check your hearing, but can also distinguish if loss of hearing is because of some neural (nerve pathway) problem or a transmission problem in your ear (like wax buildup)

Nose 
Your doctor is going to look up your nose for this part and this is what your doctor will be doing:
Look up your nose
An otoscope with a disposable tip will be gently inserted inside your nose to check the mucosa (inner lining) of the nose, the septum (midline structure), and some sinuses in your nose
Press on bones of face
Checking to see if your [frontal and maxillary] sinuses are tender

Mouth 
Are you ready to say “ahhh” and have a tongue depressor (the flat wooden tool) on your tongue? It might be a little uncomfortable, but it tells doctors a lot of information about your health. This is what your doctor will be doing during this part of the physical exam:
Check the general appearance of your Lips, gums, inner cheek, and teeth
Ask you to stick your tongue out “ahhh”
Checking to see that it is does not move to one side
A nerve issue can cause it to lean to one side
Look Under your tongue and general mouth area
Ask you to say “ahhhh” or “ehhhhh” to look at your pharynx, or the very back of your mouth

Neck 
Your neck has your thyroid, the artery and veins to your head and brain, lymph nodes, the airway, and your esophagus (empties into your stomach) all in it. Doctors will look at general neck structures during this part of the physical exam: 
Your doctor will inspect your neck for any masses and discolorations
Issues with your thyroid levels can cause a large thyroid. 
Press lightly on different parts of neck area
Checking lymph nodes in front of and behind the ears, under the chin, under the jaw, over your clavicle, and at a few other spots
Size and shape, as well as tenderness, can tell doctors a lot. If tender, there can be inflammation, and if enlarged, it can indicate lymph drainage problems
See if the trachea (tube air goes through) is centered or to the side
Feel your throat
Checking the size and symmetry of your thyroid, and movement while swallowing
Usually checked from the front and the back

Chest, Heart, Lungs and Airways (Cardiovascular and Respiratory) 
Here comes the part where that cold stethoscope goes on your back and chest, but it is for an important reason. Your heart and lungs are two of the most important organs in your body. Your doctor will be tapping, feeling, and listening to your back and chest to find out what is happening with your lungs, heart, spine, and kidneys. 

Back 
This is the part of the exam when your doctor will feel your spine, listen to your lungs, and tap on your kidneys. Here is what your doctor will be doing and what your doctor will be looking for: 
First your doctor will feel and tap your back
Why is the doctor feeling and tapping on your back?
Generally examining for irregular moles, bruising, discoloration, lumps
Feeling your vertebrae (spine) to make sure nothing is broken, tender, or sticking out
Gently tapping various spots on your back (percussion)
Based on the sound, the doctor can determine if the area is fluid filled, air filled, or solid. This will also be done on your abdomen
“Costocervical tenderness” is performed by gently tapping the side of your lower back. This checks for kidney tenderness, since the kidneys are closer to your back than to your front
Feel for chest expansion by keeping both hands across the span of your back
Checking to make sure movement is symmetric and with a good range of motion
Ask you to say ninety nine
Why are you saying “ninety nine” or something similar multiple times?
This is used to check the quality of vibrations going through the chest wall as you speak
They can be decreased or absent if you talk softly or if there is fluid or solid tissue in the pleural space (lung area)
The vibrations can be increased with other conditions or at larger parts of the airways
Ask you to take deep breaths while the stethoscope is on you
Using a stethoscope, the doctor will listen to different parts of the lung as you breathe in and out. Your doctor will move from one side to another before moving down to the next level for comparison’s sake. Different sounds that might be heard include normal breath sounds (like soft rustling), wheezing, crackling (sounds like bubbles), and more! They might also be absent or low. 
Breath sounds are used to figure out if lungs and airways are normal or if there is fluid or some other type of obstruction without even having to order a chest x-ray! Of course, a chest x-ray can be the next step if something abnormal is noted (more on that in the labs/tests section!)

Front of chest 
Your doctor will continue the lung exam on the front and start listening to your heart. Here is what your doctor will be doing and be looking for during this part of the physical exam:
Doctors will always be trying to protect your modesty, especially if you are a female. For the most part (aside from the breast examination), a doctor will ask you to move/lift your own breast or will do so courteously if you have some sort of movement restriction
Look generally at chest movement and appearance
The doctor will do a repeat of most of the exams that were performed on the back. There is a repeat/overlap between examination on the back and front of the chest, since the lungs can be assessed from both sides. Certain lobes of the lungs (divisions of the lungs) can be heard better from the front vs the back
Placing their hands across the span of your ribcage. This is a great way to check for movement and symmetry
Feeling your chest wall while you say “ninety nine” to, again, check for vibration transmission
Tapping different areas on both sides to check for any unusual dullness or hyperresonance
Ask you to take some more deep breaths 
This is to check breath sounds on the front of the chest, as well as on the side, underneath your armpit
Listen to the “lub-dub” of your heart
The valves of the heart help direct blood flow/keep blood in certain chambers (divisions) of the heart at a given time. There are 4 valves: aortic, pulmonic, tricuspid, and mitral. There are 4 distinct spots where a doctor can listen and hear the opening and closing of these valves. The valves are what make the lub-dub sound you might have heard of!
Listening at the four spots helps the doctor make sure your heart is working properly. Different patterns between the normal “lub-dub” can indicate stenosis (stiffening/narrowing) of these valves, or other heart problems. Don’t worry, unlike the breath sounds, you can breathe normally while the doctor is listening! 
Your doctor might have you turn on your side to better listen to something called the “point of maximal impulse.” this is basically the spot where you can feel/hear your heart beating the strongest. It can be extra strong or moved to the side in some disease states
One of the valve spots and the point of maximal impulse are right under/near where the breast is. It is possible the doctor might ask you to lift your chest or breast at this point to better listen to your heart
Shine a light on your neck
Why is there light on your neck?
The doctor will be looking at one of the veins on your neck and looking at its pulsations (or bobbing), as well as if it is extra noticeable (distended). Your doctor might also use a small  ruler or notecard to see how high up it can be seen. Certain conditions can cause distention or pulsations higher up than normal

Breast, armpits (axilla), and underarms
Your armpits and breasts are important to your health and your doctor will be doing the following in the physical exam:
Your Doctor may perform The Breast Exam: 
This can be very important for early recognition of breast cancer, infection, or impaired drainage (especially the drainage of fluid that has cells which fight infections) in the area
Doctors are trained to do this professionally and should be making sure you are comfortable. This is important for health screening- early recognition can be very helpful for outcomes! 
A misconception is that only females can get breast cancer. Males can also get it! Everyone has breast tissue and certain genes (DNA codes) that can higher a person’s risk for breast cancer! 
Your doctor will look for certain things, as listed below. Changes can be warrant further tests:
Symmetry
Color (can have redness in infection or cancer)
Quality of skin (thickened, swollen?)
Veins
Nipple size, shape, direction, discharge
Ask you to move your arms in different positions
Why are you moving your arms in different positions?
This allows visualization from different angles- the movement might show changes that might not be noticed with your arms at your sides
Your doctor will feel the breast area
Why is the doctor feeling the breast area?
This will be done with you on your back in an effort to flatten the breast and better feel for any masses or nodules (smaller lumps)
Approximately three fingers are used in a circular motion in many areas to identify any abnormalities. This is done in many different areas since abnormalities can be small or in any part.
This is something you can do at home, too! 
Check your Underarm
Inspect your underarm skin 
You can get rashes from something as simple as your deodorant or a new detergent! You might also get some irritation from an ingrown hair in the area
Feel along your underarm
There are a lot of lymph nodes (important for fighting germs) in this area. Feeling the lymph nodes is a good tool to see if there is any local infection and other disease process

Belly (Abdomen)
Your belly contains most of your digestive tract and can tell your doctor a lot about your health. Your doctor will be doing and be looking for the following in this part of the physical exam:
Inspect your belly
Your doctor is looking for discolorations, bruises, symmetry, and organ enlargement 
Listen to your belly
Why is the doctor listening to my stomach?
Listening to your intestines as they rhythmically contract and make a noise. It’s the quieter version of when your stomach makes noises when you’re hungry. This is a good sign- it means all the food is moving through your digestive system properly
Listening to arteries- a stethoscope can actually be used to listen to the movement of blood in an artery. More specifically, the doctor is listening for any harsh sounds, called “bruits,” that indicate turbulent flow. Imagine the Grand Rapids, but on a smaller scale in your arteries. Just like rocks can cause turbulent water flow, plaques or narrowing of the arteries can cause turbulent blood flow.  
Can listen at a few different spots that correspond to different but specific important arteries. Examples include the abdominal aorta, which provides blood to the lower half of your body, and the renal (kidney) arteries. 
Tap on your belly
Why is there tapping (again)? 
Similar to the tapping on your back and chest, this is a good way for doctors to see if the areas are hollow, solid, or fluid filled. On the abdomen, it is used to see where your liver and spleen are located. These are usually protected by your ribs or just sticking out under the ribs. If the doctor can feel dullness at a lower level, this might indicate enlargement of the liver. This is an easy inspection tool that can tell doctors if something might be wrong without having to order tests. If your doctor suspects something based on the exam, your doctor can go from there and perhaps order more tests or perform more specific examinations. 
Press down on your belly
Why is the doctor pressing on your belly?
This is referred to as palpation. It is used to check for any tenderness, enlarged organs, masses, and muscle resistance in the areas. It will usually be done lightly, then slightly deeper (but not painfully!) to check superficially then deeply. This order is to make sure there is no extra discomfort to you if a particular spot is tender

Genitals, Bladder, and Butt (rectum) [genitourinary] 
Your genitals and butt (rectum) are important to your health. Your doctor is a trained professional who will make sure you are covered and as comfortable as possible during this part of the physical exam. 
Why do doctors need to check genitalia?
As mentioned before, this should be performed keeping you as covered and comfortable as possible. Changes or discomfort in genitalia can be because of drainage problems causing swelling, hernias (internal organs pushing out), cancer, or discharge from sexually transmitted diseases. Inspection can clue your doctor in if something is going on. Your doctor can use this information to make sure you are as healthy as possible. All this information stays confidential between the patient and the doctor! 
Examination of the penis
Inspect the Penis 
General inspection can reveal otherwise unnoticed cancers, scars, or lumps
Palpate the Penis
This can help the doctor check for any swelling or tenderness
If there is some swelling, the doctor might shine a light from behind onto the area. This might seem unusual, but it helps to figure out if the swollen area is filled with clear fluid, blood, or tissue
Why are you standing up as the doctor is sitting?
Herniations (or internal organs pushing out) are best checked in this position. The doctor will look for any unusual bulges and feel scrotal tissue (there is an opening around here that internal organs can come down through) and the upper front of the thigh for these bulges. 
Examination of the vulva
This will be performed professionally and with cloth covering most areas to make you more comfortable. This can feel like a very vulnerable position, so the doctor will most likely describe the steps before performing them so nothing is unexpected. Your feet will be in stirrups. 
Inspect the external genitalia
The doctor will inspect the external genitalia. This includes the: mons pubis, labia, perineum, labia minora, clitoris, urethral orifice, and vaginal opening. This is usually done with a light. The doctor will separate the labia (lips) to check for any swelling, secretions, or bumps, as well as inflammation. 
If there is a sign of inflammation of the secretion producing glands, the doctor might insert one gloved finger gently into the vagina and perform a forward movement to check for any discharge from the urethral opening (the urethral opening is where you would pee from)
Look inside the vagina 
What is a speculum and why is it used?
A speculum is a device used to open the vagina up to look at the cervix. The cervix is at the top of the vaginal canal. To increase comfort, the doctor will choose a size appropriate speculum and use lubricant. The cervix undergoes changes during pregnancy, with injury, with cancers, and with a few other conditions.
It is used to perform pap smears, or collection of tissue of the area with a cotton applicator stick (painless collection) to check for cervical cancer. 
Feel the genitalia
Why is the doctor using fingers to feel the vagina, cervix, and uterus?
Using lubricated index and middle fingers, the doctor can apply pressure toward the back wall of the vagina to check for any tenderness or bumps and also to feel the cervix and other nearby structures. For example, increase in uterus size can indicate pregnancy or a type of tumor. 
Examine the anus and rectum
These can also feel uncomfortable, so the doctor will do their best to ensure comfort and properly drape you with cloth. 
This is usually done with the patient standing, while bending over the table. This makes the exam easier. 
The finger used will be lubricated to increase comfort. General inspection will be done first. 
This examination is done to see if the tone of the sphincter (muscle around the opening of the anus) is fine. If too tight or too loose, this can have certain indications. It also is used to check for any bumps. 
This is especially important in people with male anatomy to try to feel the prostate. The prostate is an internal organ and can develop cancer. The rectum (tube opening into the anus) gives doctors a way to feel the prostate. 

Muscles, bones, joints, ligaments, tendons and movement (Musculoskeletal)
The physical exam wouldn’t be complete without checking your muscles, bones, and joints. In this part of the exam your doctor will be testing your range of motion and checking your joints, the door hinges or levers for your bones. This part of the physical exam includes:
Checking your joints and range of motion at the:
Head and neck
Hands and wrists
Elbows
Shoulder and surrounding area
Spine and hips
Knees
Feet and ankles
Feel the bones, joints, and muscle
Can check for tenderness, inflammation, fluid build up, displacement (something is in the wrong spot)
Why is the doctor moving different limbs/parts or having you move these parts? 
Checking for any movement problems or nerve or tendon/ligament (connect bones to muscles or other bones) issues
Things that can be suspected with these tests include: carpal tunnel, arthritis, tendonitis [swelling of tendons, which connect muscle to bone], muscle atrophy (breakdown/shrinkage), and bursitis (swelling/irritation of the fluid filled sacs at joints)

Brain and Nerves (Neurology)
You make it through all these different exams and now your doctor asks three strange questions. Do you know your name? Do you know where you are? Do you know today’s date? The doctor then has you do some strange movements like touching the doctor’s finger and then touching your nose, and has you stand up with your arms out for what feels like minutes. Why do doctors have you do this? All of these tell doctors vital information about your brain. Here is what happens during this portion of the physical exam: 
Your doctor will first ask you some questions:
Do you know your name?
Do you know where you are?
Do you know today's date?
Can you remember these 3 random items?
Can you spell [insert word] backwards?
Can you count backwards by 100 by a certain number?
What is the point of all these questions?
Some questions let the doctor know if you are aware of your surroundings. Others test your memory (like having you recall three words). Some questions will see if you can process things properly and concentrate on a task. Different neurological (brain and its pathway) problems can change your ability to do these things
Ask you how something feels
Why is the doctor asking how things feel?
Nerves can cause muscle movement but can also help you feel sensations. To check sensations/nerves, the doctor will stroke your skin on the left and right or see if you can distinguish between a dull or slightly sharp sensation. The left and right is usually always done for comparison basis. This is usually done on the face, arms, and feet. 
Ask you to pull or push against your doctors hands
Why do you have to try to resist against movement?
This is to test muscle strength. You might have diminished strength in one area and might not notice it! Certain disorders can only affect one side, so this is another time the left-right comparison comes in handy! The doctor will usually have you try to push against their hand.
Ask you to walk across the room
Why do you have to walk across the room?
One part of the brain, called the cerebellum, makes sure you can walk in a straight line without stumbling or swaying. By having you walk across the room in a straight line, heel to toe, the doctor can test cerebellar function. 
Does this test sound familiar? 
The police sometimes uses this test to check for alcohol intoxication. This is because one of the areas alcohol affects is the cerebellum (causing stumbling while drunk)
Ask you to hold your arms out
Why are you holding your arms out? 
This can check for certain conditions that might cause your arms to move towards one side or position
Ask you to touch your finger to your nose and then to your doctor’s finger
Why do you have to rapidly move your hands &/or touch your nose? 
Coordination and sense of position is tested with this- also used to check cerebellar function
Move your fingers and toes
Position sense can also be tested by moving certain fingers or toes and asking you which direction the movement was in (up or down)
Ask you how many fingers were pressed down on your skin or what was drawn on your skin
Why are you asked about one or two point touch or what was drawn on your hand?
Distinguishing between 1 point touch vs 2 point & being able to tell what number was drawn on your hand can give information about sensory function and function of specific parts of the brain
Check your reflexes
What are reflexes and why are they checked?
With slight tapping using a soft foam-like hammer (will not be painful!), the doctor can check reflexes on both sides. Reflexes occur with gentle tapping on muscles and cause your muscle in that area to jerk or twitch. There are usually specific locations a doctor will check. These reflexes can be decreased or increased with certain disease forms. Reflexes (seen as a jerk) are involuntary movement, so you don’t have to worry about doing anything- simply relax!
Locations
Lower arm, close to wrist (brachioradialis)
Arm, above the elbow crease (brachial)
Arm, behind elbow (triceps)
Knee
Ankle
Another reflex that is seen in infants can be checked by stroking the bottom of the foot. There will be movement of the toes, but movement in the opposite direction than normal in adults (but seen normally in infants) can indicate a neurological problem.









Common Labs 
You finish answering what feels like 100s of questions, and have had lights shined in your eyes and ears, a cold stethoscope on your back and chest, and had all of your reflexes checked. Your doctor now says that you need to get some blood work (maybe even pee in a cup). The doctor says it’s important for you get X, Y and Z checked, but you have no idea why your doctor needs any of these. Each lab your doctor orders for you can help with the differential diagnosis or for general health checkups. Just like in the interview, every lab your doctor orders has a reason and here is what the doctor may order, and why:
A-a Gradient Blood Test
The A-a gradient is the difference in oxygen in your lungs compared to your arteries. The A-a gradient is important in the detection of lung diseases.
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT)
aPTT is a test to determine how well your blood is clotting. It can be used in detection of various bleeding and clotting disorders.
Alpha Fetoprotein (AFP) Test
The AFP test is used in pregnancy. Too high or too low levels of AFP can be caused by different medical conditions.
Anti-Cyclic Citrulline Peptide Test (Anti-CCP)
The anti-CCP test is used to detect rheumatoid arthritis.
Antinuclear antibody (ANA)
Antinuclear antibody is used in the detection of Lupus and other autoimmune disorders.
Blood Culture
When your doctor suspects an infection, your doctor will want to grow (culture) the bacteria, parasite, or fungus to determine what the infection is. Viruses will not culture. Knowing the infection will allow your doctor to give you the best treatment for that infection. 
Blood Toxicology Screen
Like the urine toxicology screen, a blood toxicology screen is used to detect drugs in your blood.
Celiac Disease Panel
A Celiac Disease Panel is used to identify if you have Celiacs disease. The panel looks for antibodies associated with the disease in your blood. A small intestine biopsy will be done to confirm the diagnosis. 
Complete Blood Count (CBC)
A complete blood count is a very common blood test that almost everyone will get at some point in their life. It tells doctors a lot of information. A complete blood count will look at your white blood cells (WBCs), hemoglobin, hematocrit, red blood cells (RBCs), and platelets (help with clotting). Each of these tells your doctor vital information about your health. See below for what each is and what changes can indicate:
Hematocrit
Hematocrit is the measure of the volume of red blood cells compared to the total blood volume. It is also important for detecting anemia.
Hemoglobin
Hemoglobin is what carries the oxygen in your red blood cells. The amount of hemoglobin in your blood is important for detecting anemia (blood has a lower ability to carry oxygen to deliver to your tissues).
Mean Corpuscular Volume
Mean Corpuscular Volume is the measure of the size of your red blood cells. This is important in determining the kind of anemia.
Platelets
Platelets are what clots your blood when you get a cut. Low platelets put you at risk for bleeding and high platelets put you at risk of forming large or unnecessary blood clots.
Red Blood Cell Count
Your red blood cells carry the oxygen you breathe in and deliver it to the rest of your body. 
Reticulocyte count
Reticulocytes are immature red blood cells.
White Blood Cells  
Your white blood cells play a role in fighting infections in your body. Elevated WBCs can mean an infection is going on in your body. The different types of white blood cells can point to different types of infections in the differential diagnosis.
Bands
Bands are immature neutrophils that increase in number when there is a bacterial infection in your body. They are like the young teenagers and the neutrophils are like the adults. Normally, the adult blood cells will monitor your body. When there is an infection, the need for more fighters is necessary, so the younger cells are sent out to fight before they mature into adults. 
Basophils
Basophils can be raised in asthma, skin inflammation, and parasitic infections.
Eosinophils
Eosinophils can be raised in inflammation and parasitic infections.
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes can be raised by viral infections or chronic inflammation.
Monocytes
Monocytes can be raised in chronic inflammation, parasitic or viral infections, and some bacterial infections.
Neutrophils
Neutrophils are raised in bacterial infections.
Comprehensive Metabolic Panel + Basic Metabolic Panel 
The basic metabolic and comprehensive metabolic panel is another common test that almost everyone will get at some point in their life. This panel tells doctors a lot about your metabolism (normal chemical processes going on in your body). This panel looks at Albumin, Ions (Calcium, Chloride, Potassium, and Sodium), and some enzymes. 
The basic metabolic panel looks at your blood urea nitrogen, calcium, carbon dioxide (bicarbonate), chloride, creatinine, glucose, potassium, and sodium. 
A comprehensive metabolic panel contains the basic metabolic panel plus Alanine Aminotransferase, Albumin, Alkaline Phosphatase, Aspartate Aminotransferase, calcium, total bilirubin, and total protein. 
Here is what both panels contain and what each part means:
Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT)
Alanine Aminotransferase is a liver enzyme that looks at how your liver is working. Liver enzymes may be elevated during liver disease.
Albumin
Albumin is used to determine your general nutrition and protein levels in your body. A low albumin can mean malnutrition (not getting the nutrients needed by your body).
Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP)
Alkaline Phosphatase is a liver enzyme that looks at how your liver is working. Liver enzymes may be elevated during liver disease.
Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST)
Aspartate Aminotransferase is a liver enzyme that looks at how your liver is working.  Liver enzymes may be elevated during liver disease.
Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
Blood urea nitrogen is the measure of urea in your bloodstream. Urea is created when you digest and break down protein.
Calcium (Ca++)
Calcium plays an important role in your bones, teeth, heart and nerves. Too much (hypercalcemia) or too low (hypocalcemia) can indicate different health problems.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
Carbon dioxide is what we breathe out of our lungs and is created during normal chemical reactions in our body. Too much or too little CO2 can indicate a health problem.
Chloride (Cl-)
Chloride is used in a lot of different processes in our body and too high (hyperchloremia) or too low (hypochloremia) amounts of chloride can indicate a health problem.
Creatinine
Creatinine is used to measure how well your kidneys are working. Too high or too low can indicate a health problem.
Glucose
Glucose is a source of energy for all of the cells in our body. Too much (hyperglycemic) glucose or too little (hypoglycemic) glucose can indicate different health problems. Monitoring your glucose is very important in the management of diabetes.
GFR (Glomerular Filtration Rate)
GFR is a measurement of how well your kidneys are functioning.
Potassium (K+)
Potassium is used in a lot of different processes in our body and too low (hypokalemia) or too high (hyperkalemia) amounts of potassium can indicate health problems.
Sodium (Na+)
Sodium is in almost everything we eat and it plays an important role in many different parts of our body. Too high (hypernatremia) or too low (hyponatremia) amounts can indicate different health problems.
Total Bilirubin
Bilirubin is an orange-yellow substance created from the breakdown of red blood cells and hemoglobin. High levels of bilirubin can cause jaundice (yellowing of the skin).
Total Protein
Total protein is used to determine your general nutrition and the amount of protein in your body. A low total protein can mean malnutrition.
Cortisol
Cortisol is a hormone found in your blood. Cortisol is important in your stress response, blood sugar level, blood pressure, and regulation of metabolism. The cortisol test can be used to detect Cushing's disease, Addison's Disease, and other adrenal gland diseases. 
C-Reactive Protein (CRP)
The CRP test looks at how much inflammation is occurring in the body. CRP can be used to detect inflammation in your arteries and can detect some cancers.
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR)
The ESR test looks at how fast your red blood cells settle to the bottom of a test tube. Increased ESR can mean inflammation is occuring in the body.
Estradiol
Estradiol is a hormone in your blood made from the adrenal glands, breasts, and ovaries. Estradiol is important for the growth and development of female reproductive organs. Estradiol is also found in men and does impact male reproductive organs as well. The estradiol test is used for abnormal periods, abnormal vaginal bleeding, and infertility in women. 
hCG (Human Chorionic Gonadotropin)
The hCG test looks at your hCG hormone level in your body. hCG can be used to detect pregnancies and some cancers.
Hemoglobin A1c
Hemoglobin A1c is your average blood sugar level over the last couple of months. This test is used in the detection and management of diabetes.
Hepatitis A Panel
A Hepatitis A Panel looks for virus particles (antigen) or antibodies (your immune response to the virus) to detect a Hepatitis A infection.
Hepatitis B Panel
A Hepatitis B Panel looks for virus particles (antigen) or antibodies (your immune response to the virus) to detect a Hepatitis B infection.
Hepatitis A, and B Titer
A Hepatitis A and B titer looks at your antibody level for Hepatitis A and B. Your antibodies protect you from these infections. Your doctor may want to give you a booster shot if your titers are low.
Hepatitis C Panel
A Hepatitis C Panel looks for virus particles (antigen) or antibodies (your immune response to the virus) to detect a Hepatitis C infection.
HIV Test
HIV testing is recommended for everyone. There are multiple parts to the test. The first looks for HIV particles (antigens) and HIV antibodies (fit the specific HIV antigen). The second test differentiates the type of HIV infection. The last test is a Nucleic Acid Test, which is also used to differentiate the type of HIV infection. Not all parts will necessary need to be done, depending on initial results. 
CD4 count
Your CD4 cells are part of your immune system and are one of the types of cells HIV infects. A low CD4 count puts you at risk for getting infections. Current HIV therapy can keep your CD4 counts from getting low.
HIV Viral Load
HIV Viral Load looks at how much RNA (one of the main parts of the HIV virus) is in your blood. 
LH and FSH (Luteinizing hormone and Follicle-stimulating hormone)
LH and FSH are hormones made in the pituitary gland that are important to the menstrual cycle in women. LH and FSH Test can be used to detect pituitary disorders, menopause, abnormal periods, and difficulties getting pregnant. 
Lipid Panel
A Lipid Panel looks at your HDL, LDL, triglycerides, and Cholesterol. All of these are very important to your cardiovascular health. Some of these can be confusing; here is what each means:
HDL Cholesterol 
HDL is your good cholesterol. HDL removes cholesterol from your tissues so it can go back to your liver to be digested.
LDL Cholesterol
LDL is your bad cholesterol. LDL brings cholesterol from your liver to your tissues. High LDL levels can increase your risk for atherosclerosis (build up of plaque in your tissues).
Triglycerides
Triglycerides are a type of fat in your body. Triglycerides play an important role in your cardiovascular health. 
Cholesterol
Cholesterol is found in most of your body tissues and plays an important role in your cell membranes, hormone production, and part of your bile acids. Too much cholesterol can increase your risk of coronary artery disease (CAD).
Liver Function Test
A Liver function test looks at how well your liver is functioning. The test looks specifically at your bilirubin and liver enzymes. An increase in these values may indicate liver disease. 
Lumbar puncture (Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Test)
A Lumbar puncture is typically performed for meningitis, or encephalitis. When your doctor suspects either of these infections, your doctor will want to grow (culture) the bacteria, parasite, or fungus to determine what the infection is. Viruses will not culture. Knowing the infection will let your doctor treat you with the best antibiotics for that infection.
Lyme Disease Panel
Lyme disease is a bacterial infection transmitted by ticks. The Lyme disease panel looks for Lyme Antibodies. 
MMR (Measles, Mumps, Rubella) Antibody Titer
A Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR) titer looks at your antibody level for measles, mumps, and rubella. Your antibodies protect you from these infections. Your doctor may want to give you a booster shot if your titers are low. 
MonoSpot
A MonoSpot test is used to detect Mononucleosis (Mono) infection. This infection is caused by Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV).
Nutrition Blood Test 
A Nutrition Blood Test looks at the levels of different vitamins and building blocks in your body. Vitamins, amino acids, antioxidants, fatty acid and metabolites all are important to your health. Here is what your doctor will be looking at in the nutrition blood test:
Amino Acids
Amino Acids are the building blocks for your proteins. There are twenty different kinds of amino acids our body uses to make proteins.
Antioxidants
Antioxidants protect your Red blood cells and cell membranes from free radical damage (forms because of a certain type of breakdown of metabolites).
Calcium (Ca)
Calcium is a mineral that plays an important role in your bones, teeth, heart and nerves. Not enough Calcium can cause bone weakness. Calcium is found in milk, fruits, vegetables, nuts and cheeses.
Copper (Cu)
Copper is a mineral that plays a role in blood vessels, nerves, bones, and the immune system. Not enough Copper causes tiredness and weakness. Copper is found in nuts, grains, beans, and meats.
Fatty Acids
Fatty Acids are the building blocks for the different type of fat in the body.
Iron
Iron is a mineral that plays an important role in blood production. Iron is part of your hemoglobin. Not enough iron can cause anemia. Iron is found in meats, fish, poultry, and some plants.
Magnesium (Mg)
Magnesium is a mineral that plays a role in normal nerve, muscle, bone, and immune function. Not enough Magnesium causes tiredness, muscle cramps, and mental and bone problems. Magnesium is found in chocolate, fish, nuts, grains, seeds, and tofu.
Manganese (Mn)
Manganese is a mineral that plays a role in metabolism across the body including your bones and nerves. Not enough manganese can cause bone problems and low fertility. Manganese is found in whole grains, nuts, leafy vegetables, and teas.
Metabolites
Metabolites are what comes from various different metabolic reactions across the body. Different amounts of different metabolites can indicate different health problems. 
Vitamin A (Retinol)
Vitamin A is important for your vision. Not enough Vitamin A can lead to night blindness, dry skin, and other vision problems. Too much vitamin A can cause other problems. Vitamin A is found in leafy vegetables and fruits.
Vitamin B1(Thiamine)
Vitamin B1 is important for metabolism all across the body. It is used in the breakdown of glucose. Low Vitamin B1 can lead to a lower amount of energy for your cells. This especially impacts your brain and heart. Vitamin B1 is found in beef, milk, nuts, oats, oranges, pork, eggs, seeds, legumes, peas and yeast.
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin)
Vitamin B2 is important for metabolism all across the body. Not enough Vitamin B2 can cause inflammation of the lips and vision problems. Vitamin B2 is found in milk, meat, eggs, nuts, enriched flour, and green vegetables.
Vitamin B3 (Niacin)
Vitamin B3 is important for metabolism all across the body. Not enough Vitamin B3 can cause an inflamed tongue and pellagra (diarrhea, forgetfulness, and skin problems). Vitamin B3 is found in yeast, meat, fish, milk, eggs, green vegetables, and cereal grains.
Vitamin B5 (Pantothenic Acid)
Vitamin B5 is important for the fat metabolism in your body. Not enough vitamin B5 can lead to skin problems, G.I, problems, and adrenal gland problems. Vitamin B5 is found in a wide variety of food including meat, vegetables, and grains.
Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine)
Vitamin B6 is important to your liver and your nerves. Not enough Vitamin B6 can cause irritability, anemia, tingling, and burning sensations. Vitamin B6 is found in fish, beef liver and other organ meats, potatoes and other starchy vegetables, and non-citrus fruits.
Vitamin B7 (Biotin)
Vitamin B7 is important for metabolism all across the body. Not enough Vitamin B7 can cause skin problems and G.I. problems. Vitamin B7 is found in a wide variety of food including meat, vegetables, and grains.
Vitamin B9 (Folate)
Vitamin B9 is important for metabolism all across the body and helps synthesize your DNA and RNA. Not enough Vitamin B9 can cause anemia (Macrocytic), and a swollen tongue. Vitamin B9 is found in beans, citrus fruits, whole grains, and green leafy vegetables.
Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin)
Vitamin B12 is important for metabolism all across the body and helps in DNA synthesis. Not enough Vitamin B12 can cause anemia (macrocytic), and tingling and burning sensations. Vitamin B12 is found in fish, meat, poultry, eggs, milk, and fortified grains.
Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid)
Vitamin C is both an antioxidant (protect against a specific type of breakdown of metabolites) and important in collagen (part of the skin) synthesis. Not enough Vitamin C can lead to scurvy (swollen gums, bruising, and anemia), and a weakened immune system. Vitamin C is found in many fruits and vegetables. 
Vitamin D
Vitamin D is important in calcium and phosphate absorption, and in bone health. Not enough vitamin D can cause bone pain and muscle weakness. Vitamin D can be obtained through exposure to the sun and is found in milk, and plants.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E is an antioxidant. Not enough Vitamin E can cause anemia (hemolytic), and muscle weakness. Vitamin E is found in vegetable oil, nuts, and seeds.
Vitamin K
Vitamin K is important in blood clotting. Not enough Vitamin K causes increased bleeding. Vitamin K is found in green leafy vegetables, fish, eggs, and cereals.
Zinc (Zn)
Zinc is a mineral that plays an important role in metabolism across the body. Not enough Zinc causes delayed wound healing and a weakened immune system. Zinc is found in meat, seeds, nuts, and whole grains.
Partial Thromboplastin Time (PTT)
PTT is a test to determine how well your blood is clotting. It can be used in detection of various bleeding and clotting disorders.
Prolactin
Prolactin is a hormone made in the pituitary gland that helps women produce milk after childbirth. The prolactin test is used to detect prolactinoma (a noncancerous tumor of the pituitary gland.
Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA)
PSA is a blood test that looks for PSA in your blood. PSA is produced by a man’s prostate and is used in the detection of prostate cancer.
Rapid Influenza Diagnostic Test
The Rapid Influenza Diagnostic Test looks for flu particles (antigens) from a swab from your nose or throat. This can aid in the diagnosis of the flu.
Rheumatoid Factor (RF) 
The Rheumatoid Factor test is used for the detection of inflammation in your joints. A high rheumatoid factor can mean rheumatoid arthritis (will also have anti-CCP looked at), and other inflammatory processes. 
Semen Analysis (Sperm Count Test)
A Semen Analysis is a fertility test that looks at Sperm. The test looks at the number of sperm, the movement of the sperm, and their shape. Different shapes, numbers, and movements can be caused by different medical problems.  
Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI) Testing
STI testing is important if you are sexually active. Everyone should be tested if sexually active.  Some of these infections can hide in your body for some time before becoming active. Here is what the STI Testing Panel will look at:
Chlamydia
Chlamydia is a common bacterial sexually transmitted infection that can cause pain, and burning sensations in the genitals. However, it is possible for someone to have chlamydia and not have any of these symptoms- this is what doctors call ‘asymptomatic.’ Chlamydia is detected by a swab from females and from urine from males.
Genital Herpes
Genital herpes is a common viral sexually transmitted infection. Genital Herpes can cause sores and wart formation on and around the genitals. Genital Herpes is detected through HSV-1 or 2 antibodies. 
Gonorrhea
Gonorrhea is a very common bacterial sexually transmitted infection that can cause swelling and pain in the genitals. Gonorrhea is detected by a swab from the genitals.
HIV Test
HIV testing is recommended for everyone. There are multiple parts to the test. The first looks for HIV particles (antigens) and HIV antibodies (fit the specific HIV antigen). The second test differentiates the type of HIV infection. The last test is a Nucleic Acid Test, which is also used to differentiate the type of HIV infection. Not all parts will necessary need to be done, depending on initial results. 
CD4 count
Your CD4 cells are part of your immune system and are one of the types of cells HIV infects. A low CD4 count puts you at risk for getting infections. Current HIV therapy can keep your CD4 counts from getting low.
HIV Viral Load
HIV Viral Load looks at how much RNA (one of the main parts of the HIV virus) is in your blood. 
Syphilis (RPR)
Syphilis is a common bacterial sexually transmitted infection. Syphilis can affect your genitals, mouth, and rectum. As the infection progresses, it can cause skin rashes and sore throat. In the last stages of infections it can affect your brain. Syphilis is detected through the RPR antigen.
Stool (Poop) Culture
When your doctor suspects an infection, your doctor will want to grow (culture) the bacteria, parasite, or fungus to determine what the infection is. Viruses will not culture. Knowing the specific infection will let your doctor treat you with the best treatment for that infection. 
Strep Test
Streptococcus is a very common bacterial infection. Your doctor will take a swab of your throat in order to detect strep substances (antigens).
Synovial Joint Fluid Analysis
A Synovial Joint Fluid Analysis looks at the fluid in your joints. The analysis will look at the type of cells in the fluid, the stickiness of the fluid, and protein amount in the fluid. For example, Rheumatoid Arthritis typically has a sterile (no cells) fluid that come out.
Testosterone
Testosterone is a hormone found in both men (have much more) and females. Testosterone is important for muscle and hair growth. A testosterone test is used to detect the amount of testosterone in your blood. Too high or too low of levels of testosterone can lead to different health conditions. 
Thyroid Function Test (TSH, T3, T4)
Thyroid Functions tests look at Thyroid Stimulating hormone (TSH). triiodothyronine (T3), and thyroxine (T4). Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) or hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) can be detected through this test.
Tuberculosis Test (PPD Skin test)
The PPD skin test is used to detect if you have a TB infection. TB remains inactive in your body after an infection and can reactivate later in life. A PPD is a purified protein that is injected under the skin. The amount of purified protein that is injected is safe. After it is injected you will have to come back 48-72 hours later to have it read. Your doctor is looking to see if the location where the PPD was injected is raised and how high it is raised. Depending on the population you are in (like health care worker or transplant patient), a certain cut-off is used to determine if you have TB. You may also need to get a second PPD to ensure that the first test was not a false negative. 
Uric Acid
A Uric Acid test is used to detect gout (type of arthritis). 
Urine Culture
When your doctor suspects an infection, your doctor will want to grow (culture) the bacteria, parasite, or fungus to determine what the infection is. Viruses will not culture. Knowing the infection will let your doctor treat you with the best treatment for that infection. 
Urine Test
A urine test is when your doctor asks you to pee in a cup. This test can give doctors a lot of information about your body. Here is what a urine test looks at:
Blood (Hematuria)
Blood flows in most places in our body, but it should not be in your urine. Red blood cells in your urine can indicate an infection, trauma, kidney disease, a female on her period, or cancer.
Glucose
Glucose is the energy source of the cell, but it should not be found in your urine. Glucose in the urine can indicate diabetes.
Leukocytes and Leukocyte Esterase (White Blood Cells)
White blood cells in your urine or the enzyme leukocyte esterase can indicate a urinary tract infection. 
Nitrite
Nitrites in your urine can mean a bacterial urinary tract infection. This is because some bacteria can convert normal nitrAtes to nitrItes.
pH
The pH of your urine tells you how acidic (a pH below 7) or basic (a pH above 7). Infections, diets, and other diseases can change the urine pH.
Protein (Microalbumin)
Protein is one of the building blocks of our body, but it should not be found in your urine. Protein in the urine can indicate kidney disease.
Specific Gravity
Specific Gravity measurement is a way to check if your kidney is able to concentrate your urine properly.
Urine Toxicology Screen
Urine Toxicology Screen looks for drugs and their breakdown products that may be in your urine. You may have had one of these for your job since it is used to detect illicit drugs
VZV (Varicella) Panel
A VZV (Varicella) Panel detects antibodies for both chickenpox and shingles. This test can be used to determine if you have either of these infections. 







Common Screening Tests
During your visit to the doctor, your doctor may tell you that you should get some screening tests done or have you fill out a questionnaire. Screening tests are one of the best ways of catching some really scary diseases early, and questionnaires can pick up certain conditions the doctor can discuss with you. Some screening tests look for cancer, and others look for depression. All of these tests do a fantastic job detecting health conditions. Each screen has different guidelines of when to get the screenings and what the tests look for. Just like in the interview, every screening test has a reason and here is what the doctor may use to screen you, and why:
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT)
The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test is a questionnaire used to screen for a risk of Alcohol related problems. This form will ask you 10 different questions about your alcohol use.
Ankle Brachial Index Test
A ankle brachial index test compares your blood pressure in your upper and lower limbs. This test is used to detect peripheral artery disease.
Biopsy
A biopsy is when your doctor removes a small piece of your tissue (skin, lungs, muscle) to look under a microscope. This will tell your doctor all of the characteristics about your tissue that will help in making a diagnosis.
Blood Glucose Screen for Diabetes
In order to screen for Diabetes, your Doctor may look at your blood glucose or Hemoglobin A1c  (link to it in labs). These two values can be used to screen for Diabetes or Prediabetes.
CAGE Questionnaire
The CAGE questionnaire is used to screen for a risk of Alcohol related problems. This questionnaire will ask you four questions about your use of alcohol.
Cardiac Catheterization
A cardiac catheterization is a procedure that looks at how well your heart is working. A Cardiac Catheter can be used to diagnose and treat various heart conditions.
CIWA
The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol (CIWA) is used in the assessment and management of alcohol withdrawal.
Colonoscopy
A colonoscopy is when a doctor uses a scope to look into your rectum and colon. A Colonoscopy looks for polyps (small growths), inflammation, ulcers (open sore), and cancer in your colon and rectum. Colonoscopies are recommended for everyone over the age of 50. Early detection of cancer can save your life!
CRAFFT Screening Test
The CRAFFT Screening test is used to detect substance use related risk in adolescents. The CRAFFT screening test involves your doctor asking you six questions about your life.
Drug Abuse Screening Questionnaire
The Drug Abuse Screening Test is a questionnaire used to screen for the risk of drug related problems. This questionnaire will ask you 28 different questions about your drug use.
EEG
An EEG tests the electrical activity of your brain. Your brain shows different kinds of electrical activity depending on what is happening. EEGs are great at detecting seizures, head injury, inflammation in the brain, tumors, sleep disorders, stroke, and dementia.
EKG or ECG
An EKG is commonly used in the hospital and at a cardiologist. EKGs look at how your heart is beating with a couple of electrodes (those pads with the little metal on it) placed around your chest and arm. An EKG is not painful. EKGs are used to detect many different heart diseases. 
Electromyography (EMG)
An electromyography is used to look at the electrical activity of your muscles and the nerves that control them. An EMG uses electrodes to detect the electrical signals that your nerves send your muscles for them to work. An EMG can detect nerve problems, muscles problems, or nerve to muscle transmission problems. 
Electronystagmography (ENG)
Electronystagmography is a test that records the involuntary movements of your eyes called nystagmus. An electronystagmography is helpful in diagnosing vertigo (feeling like the world is spinning), dizziness, and balance problems.
Event Monitor 
An Event Monitor is a portable device that records your heart’s rhythm. When you are feeling any symptoms, you are able to start the recorder. This can help doctors diagnose abnormal rhythms and other health conditions. 
Fecal Occult (Hidden) Blood Test
A Fecal Occult Blood Test looks at your fecal matter (poop) under the microscope for blood. This test is used to screen for for colorectal cancer, hemorrhoids, and gastrointestinal bleeding. The test is recommended for those over the age of 50.
GAD-7 Questionnaire
The GAD-7 Questionnaire is a questionnaire used to screen for anxiety. The GAD-7 will ask you 7 questions about your life in the past two weeks. Anxiety affects 1 in 13 people. You should tell your doctor if you can relate to the topics asked in any of the questions on the form. Your doctor can give you the resources or medications to help with your anxiety.
Genetic Screening
Genetic Screening can look at your DNA makeup and look for risk factors for certain diseases. Just because you have a risk factor does not mean you will get the disease; it simply increases your chance of getting the disease. If you have an increased risk factor, you may want to follow up with your doctor and see what can be done to prevent and screen for the disease. 
Holter Monitor
A Holter Monitor is portable device that records your heart’s rhythm over a 24 to 48 hour period. A Holter monitor can detect abnormal rhythms that may not have been detected on an EKG, because these rhythms might not have been occurring when the EKG was recorded. 
Loop Recorder
A Loop Recorder is a small device implanted under your skin in your chest that records your heart’s rhythm for up to 3 years. A Loop Recorder can detect abnormal rhythms that an EKG or Holter monitor may not detect.
Mammogram
A mammogram is one of the best screening tools to detect breast cancer. An early diagnosis can save your life! Mammograms are recommended for women over the age of over 40. If you have certain risk factors, like a family history of breast cancer, you doctor might recommend that you get a mammogram before your 40s. Mammograms involve taking x-rays of your breast to detect abnormal masses that can’t be felt. If a mammogram is positive your doctor will want to biopsy (take a small tissue sample of your breast) to see if it is cancerous. A biopsy recommendation does not necessarily mean you have cancer. (figured this last part would be good to add so people don’t get freaked out)
Mini Mental Status Exam
The Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE) is a test that looks at your overall cognition (normal understanding and thinking) and takes only about five minutes to complete. The MMSE will ask you some basic questions about the date, your name, where you are and will ask you to perform various other tasks. The MMSE is graded on a thirty point scale. A score of 24-30 is normal. This is a common test used to screen for Alzheimer's Disease.
Nerve Conduction Velocity (NCV) Test 
A Nerve Conduction Velocity Test measures the speed of the electrical activity your nerves conduct. During this test, your nerve will be stimulated with electrodes and the speed of transmission will be detected. A NCV is used to detect nerve problems.
Pap Smear
A Pap Smear is one of the best tools to detect cervical cancer. An early diagnosis can save your life. Pap Smears are recommended for women over the age of 21. Your doctor will be gently taking some of the cells from your cervix (the opening to the uterus) using a cotton tipped applicator and then will look at them under a microscope to detect any abnormalities. 
Peak Flow Measurement
A Peak flow measurement is when your doctor asks you to blow as hard as you can into the Peak Flow tube. The Peak flow is a measure of how air you can get out of your lung. The Peak flow is used in screening and managing asthma.
PHQ-9 - Depression Screen
The PHQ-9 is a form that you fill out to screen for Depression. The form will ask you nine questions about your life and mood. Depression affects 1 in 15 adults and can impact your health. You should tell your doctor if you have been feeling depressed or can relate to the topics asked in any of the questions on the form. Your doctor can give you the resources or medications to help you through your depression.
Prostate Exam
The prostate exam is especially important in people with male anatomy to try to feel the prostate. The prostate is an internal organ and can develop cancer. Your doctor will be putting a finger (wearing gloves) into your anus (butthole) and into the rectum, where it is possible to feel your prostate. Your doctor will be able to feel for any growths in the prostate that would need further investigating. Early detection of cancer can save your life!
PSQI - Insomnia Screen
The PSQI is a form that you fill out. It is used to screen for Insomnia (difficulty falling asleep). The form will ask you 9 different questions about your sleep. The questions range from the time you usually go to bed to how long it takes you to fall asleep. 
Pulmonary Function Test (PFT)
A Pulmonary Function Test measures how well your lungs work. PFTs measure your lung size and air flow in and out of your lungs. A PFT can be used to diagnose various lung conditions.
Pulse Oximetry
A Pulse Oximeter looks at how much oxygen is in your blood out of 100%. Low pulse oxygen can be a sign of not getting enough oxygen because of a breathing, circulation, or lung problem. 
Sleep Study
A Sleep study looks at your sleep throughout the night. A sleep study is used for diagnosing various sleep conditions including sleep apnea, insomnia, narcolepsy, and restless leg syndrome.
Stress Test
A Stress test shows how well your heart is working during exercise. Exercise causes your heart to beat faster and harder and can reveal problems with the blood flow to your heart. The Stress test may involve you walking on a treadmill or being given a drug that mimics exercise while having an EKG, blood pressure, and breathing rate recorded. This test can be used to detect coronary artery disease and irregular rhythms and can help your doctor treat you.
Tests During Pregnancy 
There are a lot of different tests you may receive during pregnancy. Here are some of the common ones you might receive: 
Amniocentesis
Amniocentesis is a test during pregnancy used to detect genetic diseases, birth defects, and other pregnancy related problems. Amniocentesis uses a hollow needle to sample amniotic fluid.
Biophysical Profile
A Biophysical profile uses a nonstress test and ultrasound to check the health of the fetus. The Biophysical profile will measure the fetus’s movement, heart rate, fetal breathing movements, fetal tone, and amniotic fluid volume.
Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)
Chorionic Villus Sampling is a test during pregnancy used to detect genetic diseases, birth defects, and other pregnancy related problems. During a CVS your doctor will take a small sample of cells from the placenta near the wall of the uterus.
Doppler Flow Study
Doppler flow is a type of ultrasound that can look at blood flow in the umbilical vein and arteries, fetal brain, fetal heart, and other organs. A Doppler flow is used to determine if the fetus is getting the right amount of blood, nutrients, and oxygen from the placenta.
Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring
Fetal heart rate monitoring is used during delivery to check the condition of the baby. Fetal Heart rate monitoring can detect problems during delivery and your doctor can take steps to address the problem. A normal fetal heart rate can reassure you and your doctor that labor is safe to continue.
Fetal Movement Counting
Fetal Movement Counting is also known as kick counting and is a way for the mother to monitor your baby’s movements. 
Fetal Ultrasound
Fetal ultrasound is an imaging technique that uses high frequency (so high you can’t hear sound) to image your baby in the womb. Fetal ultrasounds help your health care team evaluate your baby’s growth and development, look at how your pregnancy is progressing, and in some cases, detect possible problems. The first Ultrasound will occur during the first trimester. It does not cause any harm to the mother or the fetus. 
Genetic Screening
Genetic Screening during pregnancy can look at the fetus’s DNA makeup and look for certain diseases.
Glucose Challenge and Glucose Tolerance Test
The Glucose Challenge test is used to screen for Gestational Diabetes, which is diabetes that develops during pregnancy. For the glucose challenge you will first drink a sugary solution and one hour later will have your blood sugar measured.
Group B Strep Culture
A Group B Strep Culture is a swab around week 35 to look for the bacteria, Group B Strep. This bacteria is leading cause of neonate (first few weeks of a baby’s life) meningitis (infection of layer protecting the brain). Your doctor will give antibiotics to prevent the bacteria from spreading to your newborn during delivery.
Karyotype
A karyotype looks at the chromosomes (bundles of DNA) of the baby. A karyotype can detect various chromosomal abnormalities including extra and missing chromosomes.
Maternal Blood Tests
First Trimester
Alpha-fetoprotein
Alpha-fetoprotein is produced by the fetus and passes into the mother’s blood. Too much or too little of alpha-fetoprotein can detect birth defects and other conditions (like twins!).
hCG
hCG or human chorionic gonadotropin is commonly used to detect pregnancy. During the first few weeks of pregnancy, your hCG levels rise and then after around weeks 8-10, hCG begins to decrease. hCG level can be used to confirm pregnancy, determine the approximate age of the fetus, diagnose an abnormal pregnancy, diagnose a potential miscarriage, and screen for Down Syndrome.
Second Trimester
The Quad test 
The quad test looks at levels of alpha-fetoprotein, hCG, estriol, and inhibin. Here is what each of these tests are:
Alpha-fetoprotein
Alpha-fetoprotein is produced by the fetus and passes into the mother’s blood. Too much or too little of alpha-fetoprotein can detect birth defects and other conditions (like twins!).
Estriol
Estriol is a hormone produced by both the fetus and the mother. Estriol is used to screen for chromosomal abnormalities such as Down syndrome, Edwards syndrome, and Patau syndrome.
Inhibin
Inhibin is a protein produced by the placenta and ovaries. Inhibin is also used to screen for Down Syndrome.
hCG
hCG or human chorionic gonadotropin is commonly used to detect pregnancy. During the first few weeks of pregnancy, your hCG levels rise and then after around weeks 8-10, hCG begins to decrease. hCG level can be used to confirm pregnancy, determine the approximate age of the fetus, diagnose an abnormal pregnancy, diagnose a potential miscarriage, and screen for Down Syndrome.
Nonstress testing
The nonstress test is an easy, non-invasive test that causes no stress to the fetus. The nonstress test looks at the fetus’s movement, heart rate, and heart rate response to movement.
Tilt Table Testing
A Tilt Table test is a test you may get if you are having fainting spells. The test involves you laying down on a bed and being tilted at different angles while having your heart’s rhythm, blood pressure, and oxygen recorded. You will do this test in a special lab called the electrophysiology lab. 
Ultrasound Screening for Abdominal Aneurysm
The Ultrasound screening for Abdominal Aneurysm uses sound waves to look at the biggest artery in your body, the aorta. An abdominal aortic aneurysm is when the aorta stretches like a balloon in your belly region. If it ruptures, it can become a medical emergency. 
Urine Flow Test
A Urine flow test looks at how fast your urine is coming out over time. It may be used to look at how well your bladder and sphincters are working. 
Common Imaging Tools
You finish answering what feels like 100s of questions, and have had lights shined in your eyes and ears, a cold stethoscope on your back and chest, and had all of your reflexes checked. Your doctor now says that you need to get imaging studies done. You head on over to the imaging suite that has dozens of shiny machines. Each of these machines can take different pictures of your body. Your doctor will talk to you in depth about these procedures if you need them and will tell you how to prepare for each one. Just like in the interview, every imaging study your doctor wants you to get has a reason and here is what the doctor may order, and why:
Overview of Imaging
Why do we do imaging?
Imaging is mainly done so doctors can see inside your body. Different types of imaging procedures, which will be explained, are good to look at specific parts of the body. For example, bones and fractures can be seen very well using x-rays and the brain with MRIs and CTs.
When do we do imaging?
When the doctor suspects a certain disease process or wants to rule out something serious like a brain bleed, the doctor will order certain imaging studies. 
What is radiation? 
Radiation is all around us. It is how microwaves work, how the radio transmits, and how we have visible light. In the most basic sense of the word, radiation is the energy that particles or waves transmit. The UV light, or sun rays, releases energy in the form of a wave and is actually what causes sunburn! Different types of waves and light (like UV light, visible light, x-ray, and radio waves) are classified based on how much energy they transmit. Anything at the level of energy of radio waves or lower is generally considered safe. 
How safe are the imaging tools?
X-rays transmit more energy than radio waves. This is where you might think, “if x-rays are above the safe level, why did my doctor or dentist just take my x-ray?” To make sure people do not get too much radiation exposure during their lifetime, a measurement called the “effective dose,” measured in millisieverts (msv) is used. This measures how much radiation the entire body gets by using a number system. 
Low risk: It is estimated that every individual receives about 3 mSv of background radiation from natural sources every single year. For the most part, the imaging studies used are generally considered low risk. This means that the amount of radiation exposure is not very high when compared to the benefit of the imaging study. The imaging can allow the doctor to basically look inside your body and definitively see bone breakage or weakening, bleeding, tumors, and other problems. 
Some imaging studies, like ultrasound, do not transmit radiation!! Your doctor will try to use studies that have low or no radiation whenever possible to keep your exposure low. 
Imaging tools
Angiography
Angio- means blood vessel. Angiography is a procedure used to visualize arteries with the use of a dye. This can be especially useful to see if certain parts of organs are getting blood flow or if a vessel is blocked. The doctor will numb the area over a large artery or vein and insert a needle that helps guide a wire to where they want to look at blood flow. It is considered a type of x-ray technique, but the final images mainly only show the dye in vessels and the organ of interest. 
Arthrography
Arthro- means joints (door hinges for your bones). By injecting contrast into the bloodstream or directly into the joint and using either a CT, MRI, or fluoroscopy, it is possible to see different diseases in joints or tendons/ligaments (connect bones to muscle or other bones). 
Barium Swallow
Barium swallows are exactly how they sound. The doctor would have you swallow liquid barium (it can be described as a (safe!) metal milkshake). It is used to visualize your swallowing process to make sure liquid goes down to your stomach properly. It can show the liquid going down to the wrong tube or why you might have difficulty swallowing. It can also show problems, like pockets, in the stomach. It might make it harder to poop for a few days, but the barium eventually gets cleared out of your body. 
Brain Perfusion Scan
Perfusion is blood delivery to a tissue. This scan is used to see how much blood each part of the brain gets. You can do a brain perfusion scans using a few different imaging techniques. For example, you can use SPECT, PET, CT, or MRI, discussed earlier on this page. 
Bronchoscopy
Broncho- relates to bronchi, the branches of your airway. A bronchoscopy is used to visualize your airway. It involves the use of a tiny camera and light on a probe. This small tube is inserted through your nose or mouth. It sounds uncomfortable, but don’t worry- the doctor will give you some sort of numbing medication. It is usually done if you have constant irritation in your airway or a chest x-ray showed something weird. 
CT
CT stands for computed tomography, which is just a fancy way of saying that the imaging technique allows doctors to use x rays to capture pictures of your body in little slices. Think of the human body as a sliced loaf of bread. Each slice is a picture that the CT takes. During this procedure, you will lay on a table that moves through a large tube. The CT is a valuable tool and can be used in many situations, like checking for brain bleeds or kidney stones. Like X-rays, a CT is not painful.  
Cystography (bladder)
Cysto- refers to the bladder. It uses x-rays or fluoroscopy and involves the insertion of a thin, flexible tube to your bladder. Once the tube reaches your bladder, dye is released and the doctor can see your bladder. Your doctor might think you need one if you have trouble peeing or other urine (pee) related problems. It can check if anything is blocked or of there is another issue with your bladder. 
Echo(cardiogram)
An Echocardiogram is a specific type of ultrasound method used to watch the heart beating. It can look at the size of the main chambers of the heart, blood flow within the heart, and many other aspects related to the heart and its function.
Elastography
Elastography checks how elastic (springy) or stiff internal organs are. Different diseases will change how elastic an organ is. For example, a tumor or diseased liver would be stiffer than normal. This technique uses low frequency vibration and uses either MRI or ultrasound. It uses no radiation. 
MRI
MRIs, or magnetic resonance imaging, does not involve the use of radiation. Instead, it uses a big magnet and radio waves. This technique won’t cause you any physical pain. This is why the doctor will ask you if you have a pacemaker or any other metal on or in your body. These objects can shift when placed inside a tube that uses a large magnet. The machine looks like a long, hollow tube with a bed that slides in. MRIs are very useful to look at different conditions and parts of the body. They can be used to look at softer tissue, like your spinal cord and organs. An x-ray would not show these. The machine makes loud noises and it can seem very scary, but the technicians usually give headphones to help drown out the noise. You can always talk to your doctor if you are very worried or scared of enclosed spaces and they can try to help make you comfortable.
Myelography
‘Myelo’ means spinal cord, and ‘graphy’ means recording. Myelography involves the images of the spinal cord, nerves roots coming off the spinal cord (think roots coming off a tree trunk), and the meninges, or coverings, of the spinal cord. This procedure involves the injection of generally safe dye near the spinal cord. The radiologist can use imaging to see how the dye is moving but also take x-ray images at the same time. This is especially useful when the doctor wants to look at the spinal cord but the patient has a pacemaker or something else that would not work with an MRI. It can also be used after an MRI was done to get a more clear picture.
Nuclear Medicine (PET Scan, scintigraphy, SPECT, and V/Q Scan) 
Nuclear Medicine is a type of imaging techniques that uses very small amounts of tagged material. The basic concept behind this technique is using a molecule “tagged” with a little bit of radioactive material so the technician can track where this molecule goes. This might involve an injection, but is painless other than the injection. The technique can be used for things like localization of cancer or checking blood flow to certain areas. It is almost like the particle is wearing a bright hat, so it is very easy to spot as it moves around. Don’t worry, the particle won’t stick around your body for too long- your body will flush it out quickly, since only a small amount is used. 
There are a few different names for the imaging, like PET scan, scintigraphy, and SPECT. They have small differences in the type of tagging material, but are similar for the most part. The detectors in the machine can detect the radioactively tagged molecule. 
V/Q Scan: this is a type of nuclear medicine imaging scan. V/Q stands for ventilation/perfusion. The scan measures how much air your lungs gets (ventilation) compared to how much blood flow they get (perfusion). This scan is especially important to see if there are any clots in your lungs. For this procedure, you breathe in labelled air to check ventilation and then labelled dye is injected into a vein to check perfusion. Clots in the lung, called pulmonary (lung) embolism (clot), are very dangerous and need to be treated immediately. 
Transesophageal echo (TEE) 
A Transesophageal echo (TEE) is similar to an echocardiogram, but looks at your food pipe.
Ultrasound
Ultrasounds, like MRIs, don’t use radiation at all.This machine uses sound waves to produce images, similar to how bats use sounds to guide their movement at night. The sound waves will move through your body until it bounces off an organ or something else blocking its path. Once it does that, it bounces back to the ultrasound probe. All of this is completely painless. The doctor will use a gel at the location to help with the sound wave transmission and signal the machine gets back. You won’t hear anything though- the sound is a higher frequency than what humans can hear. 
You might associate ultrasounds with pregnant women. One use of ultrasounds is to visualize a fetus and make sure the fetus is developing properly, or even to see if the individual is having more than one baby! However, that is not all ultrasounds can be used for. They are also used to help doctors see organs, blood flow in arteries, and see inside your body during any more complex procedures. 
Venography 
Venography is basically the same as angiography, but it involves imaging veins instead of arteries.
X-ray
An x-ray is relatively common. Most people have gotten them at the dentist’s office at some point in their life. You might remember going in and seeing the person taking your x-ray step out of the room to take it (this is because they do them all day- that would be a lot of exposure every year if they did not step out of the room!). For a tooth x-ray, you get a lead vest for protection so the rest of your body does not get any exposure to the x-ray. X-rays are not painful. 
X-rays give black and white images. They are always shown against a bright white light in all the medical tv shows. X-rays show bones as white, air as black, and other tissue as an in-between shade of gray. They are great to look at your bones, especially if the doctor suspects a fracture. They are also commonly used to look at your lungs. 
Fluoroscopy refers to a type of moving x-ray. It can be used as the imaging technique for barium swallows and angiographies. 

     
Common Requests Doctors Make  - You finish answering what feels like 100s of questions, and have had lights shined in your eyes and ear, a cold stethoscope on your back and chest, and had all of your reflexes checked. You think your visit is over, but your doctor now recommends you do something. Just like in the interview, every recommendation your doctor makes has a reason and here is what some of the recommendations may be, and why:
Avoiding Food if you have an Allergy or Intolerance
Your doctor may recommend that you avoid certain foods. This is because if you have an allergy or intolerance, eating that food can cause you to get sick.
Come back in ____ Amount of Time
Your doctor may recommend that you follow-up with your doctor in a certain amount of time. Follow-ups allow doctors to assess if your condition is improving and if the treatment is working. If your condition is not improving, your doctor may try a different treatment.
Dieting
Your diet is so important to your health, and your doctor may ask you to try specific diets. Doctors may ask you to limit your salt intake, fat intake, carbohydrate intake, water intake, or increase other nutrients. Each of these diets can have major impacts on your health and make you healthier. Dieting can be scary and not all the diets floating around on the internet are safe. Your doctor can help you get started in the right direction, or refer you to a dietician or nutritionist.  One of the best ways to start a safer diet is make small changes. For example, if you drink 2 glasses of soda a day, try cutting it down to 1 a day.
Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) Order
Your doctor may ask you if you have or want a DNR order. A DNR order means you do not want CPR performed on you when your heart stops beating. Your doctor will talk to you in detail about this process if you are considering it or are curious about it. 
Increase Exercise
Doctors always seem to tell you to exercise more. This is because exercise is one of the best ways to prevent getting sick. It helps keep your muscles working (can burn calories even at rest!) and can even help your brain function better. Exercise can include weight-lifting, jogging, sprinting, swimming, and even something as simple as walking the long route to the cafeteria for lunch. It’s tough to fit exercise into our busy lives, so try to make small adjustments that can lead you to exercising a little more each day.
Get an X-Ray, CT, or MRI
Your doctor may recommend you to get imaging studies like X-rays, CT, or MRI done. Imaging studies let us see into the body and can help your doctor make a diagnosis. Visit our common imaging tools page to learn more (link to imaging page)
Get Lab Work Done
Your doctor may recommend you get lab work. Lab work tells your doctor a lot of information about your health. Each lab your doctor orders for you can help on the differential diagnosis. Visit out common labs page to learn more about labs (link to common labs)
Get Screened for a Disease
Early detection of a disease is a good way to treat it before it becomes more serious. Your doctor may recommend you to get specific screening tests. Visit our common screening tests page to learn more. (link to screening page)
Get Tested for a Disease
Your doctor may recommend you get tested for a disease. Your doctor will want to confirm if you have a disease or rule out that you don’t have a disease. Visit our common labs and common screening test page to learn more. (links to pages)
Get Vaccinated
Your doctor will recommend getting the flu vaccine every year, as well as other vaccines you may not have received yet. Vaccines are both safe and effective. They help prevent scary diseases that can make you very sick. Vaccines can reduce the spread of disease, protect your health when you travel, save money from hospital visits, and above all, save lives. Visit our common vaccines page to learn more about vaccines. (link to common vaccines)
Join a Clinical Trial
Your doctor (or you) might bring up joining a clinical trial for your condition. Clinical trials look at new drugs or devices, but each phase of clinical trials is not the same. Look below to learn about each Phase:
Phase 1
A Phase 1 Trial looks to see if the drug or device is safe to use in humans. Phase 1 trials look at a small number of healthy volunteers or patients with the disease of interest to assess the safety profile of the drug or device.
Phase 2
A Phase 2 trial looks to see if the drug or device works in humans. Phase 2 trials use a larger amount of patients to assess if the treatment is working, how much of the drug to give, and if there are any side effects.
Phase 3
A Phase 3 trial looks to see if the drug or device is better than the current treatment. It uses a large number of patients to assess if the drug or device should be used over other drugs and devices.
Phase 4
A Phase 4 trial looks to see if the drug or device should stay on the market. Phase 4 trials look for rare and long-term effects of the drug or device.
By talking to your doctor about a trial, you can find out if you meet all the criteria or if the trial would benefit you personally. 
Join a Scientific Study
Your doctor may ask you if you want to join a scientific study. Every scientific study is different, but each one helps us learn more about the human body. The more doctors and scientists learn about the human body, the more they can help treat and help patients. 
Living Will
Your Doctor may ask you if you want to create a living will. A living will is different from the will you normally think of. A living will is a legal document about your desires for medical treatment if you are no longer able to give consent (saying yes (or no) to treatment), like if you are in a coma.
Lowering Alcohol Consumption
Lowering the amount of alcohol you drink is a great way to increase your health. Even if it is cutting down on the number of drinks you have, there can be big influences on your health. It is not easy to stop drinking alcohol and your doctor will be with you throughout your journey to cutting back or quitting.
Make sure to take your Medicine on Schedule
Taking your medicine as your doctor prescribes is important. Missing your medication dose or taking too much can affect your health poorly. Ask your doctor for ways to make sure you take the right dose of medicine when you are supposed to. 
No Food or Drink before Surgery or Anesthesia 
Before every surgery, your doctor will tell you not to eat or drink for a certain number of hours before the procedure. This is because when you are under anesthesia, your body’s natural reflexes are stopped for the time being. If there is food or drink in your belly, you are at an increased risk of vomiting or aspirating (getting fluid into your lungs), which can cause you harm.  
Pregnancy 
 When you are pregnant it seems like your doctor asks you to change a lot of things in your life. Here are some of the common things your doctor will ask of you and why:
Don’t change cat litter if you’re pregnant
Cat litter and cat poop contains a parasite known as toxoplasmosis that can infect your unborn baby. Although this infection is rare, it can cause a miscarriage or damage to your unborn baby.
Food modification
Your doctor will ask you to avoid certain food and make sure to eat other food. Your doctor will want you to avoid soft cheese, raw meat, and raw fish because these foods can increase your risk of infection. Your doctor will want you to make sure you get all of the nutrients you need for you baby to be healthy. Ask your doctor to find out about what you should and shouldn’t eat.
Avoid Hot tubs/saunas 
Being in a Hot tub or sauna can increase your body’s temperature and this can be dangerous for your fetus.
No Alcohol Use
The only safe amount of alcohol during pregnancy is none. Alcohol enters your bloodstream and can go to the developing fetus. Alcohol getting to the fetus can seriously hurt the fetus.
No Smoking
The only safe amount of smoking during pregnancy is none. Smoking can cause impaired development and poor pregnancy outcomes.
Try to Stay Active
It is important to stay active while you are pregnant. Exercise during pregnancy helps with weight control, relieving stress, and strengthening your muscles.
Lay on your left side when you are resting
It may sound strange, but when you are pregnant laying on your left side while you rest can increase blood flow and nutrient delivery to your fetus. Laying on your left side keeps one of your biggest veins (Inferior Vena Cava) more open for blood flow compared to laying on your right side.
Schedule your Yearly Physical
Your doctor will recommend that you see your Primary Care Physician (PCP) for your yearly physical. Seeing your PCP on a regular basis can help catch diseases early, especially for diseases like cancer where catching the disease early can save your life.
See a Specialist - Referrals
Your Doctor may refer you to see a specialist if your medical condition is out of their scope. A specialist such as a cardiologist (heart doctor) or pulmonologist (lung doctor) is better equipped to treat medical problems in that particular specialty
Self Exams
Breast exam (for more detailed information, go to https://www.nationalbreastcancer.org/breast-self-exam) 
Who should do a self exam, and how often?
Breast cancer can occur in both females and males. It is important to do a self exam about every month in order to detect any sort of irregularity (lumps, discharge, pain, heaviness) early on. It is recommended to do it a week before the start of menstruation for menstruating women. 
How to do a self exam
It is recommended to lay flat and use three fingers to add pressure on the breast, making sure to check a little bit of the area at a time. You should be applying 3 types of pressure: light, medium, and then deep. 
What to look for?
Changes in the feel or appearance of the breast or nipple, lumps, or discharge from nipples. 
Skin Exam
Why should you do a skin exam?
Skin cancer can show up anywhere on your body, even the hard to see places like your scalp and the back of your knees. Early detection can go a long way to saving your life!
How to do a self exam
Stand naked in front of a full length mirror in a well lit room, or find a partner. Look over every part of your body, starting from your scalp (a comb is good to help you move your hair around) and finishing at the soles of your feet. Look at the color, size, and shape of any moles you find. The skin cancer foundation has a body map you can download for free to keep track of any moles you find at (https://www.skincancer.org/skin-cancer-information/early-detection/body-map) 
Testicle Exam (for more detailed information, go to https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/4637-testicular-cancer-self-exam) 
Why should you do a self exam?    
The self exam is to pick up early signs of testicular cancer. 
How to do a self exam?
Do the self exam during or after a warm shower. Use one hand to roll one testicle at a time.
What to look for?
Any lumps, bumps, irregularity, heaviness, or pain
Smoking Cessation (Quitting)
Quitting smoking is one of the best things you can do to increase your health. It is not easy to quit and your doctor will be with you throughout your journey to quitting and help you find what helps you quit or decrease the amount you smoke a day. Even small changes like reducing the number of cigarettes by a few can have huge impacts on your health.
Stay Home from Work if you have an Infection
Your doctor will recommend that you stay home when you have an infection by some germ. This is so you don’t spread the germ to others and make them sick too.
Surrogate Decision Maker
Your doctor may ask you if you have a surrogate decision maker. A surrogate decision maker is someone who will make your medical treatment decisions for you if you are no longer able to give consent (saying yes (or no) to treatment).
Wear Sunscreen
Your doctor might recommend the use of sunscreen, even on cloudy days. Sunscreen is a great way to protect your skin cells from harmful UV rays in sunlight. The melanin (skin pigment) in your skin cells can usually absorb the harmful rays, but they can get overwhelmed by the UV rays and mutate, leading to skin cancer. Even on a cloudy day when you can’t see the sun, UV rays still penetrate through the clouds. Some face lotions have SPF protection and can be recommended by your doctor for everyday use. 
 
Common Vaccines
At every visit it seems your doctor wants you get vaccinated for some germ. Doctors say this because vaccines are the best way of preventing some of world’s scariest germs. We don’t see some of these germs anymore since the start of vaccinations, but they are lurking and can have devastating effects on both children and adults if they don’t have protection against these scary germs. Vaccinations are incredibly important because they will help you not get sick in the first place (or you may only get a mild version of disease the germ causes). Just like in the interview, every vaccine your doctor wants you to get has a reason:
Click below to learn more about the truth behind vaccines (for more detailed information go to www.vaccines.gov):
Overview of Vaccines
What is a Vaccine?
A vaccine is made from very weak or dead germs that help create our body’s defenses to fight those nasty bacteria, viruses, and toxins. 
How does a Vaccine Work?
Vaccines enhance our body’s natural defense system (Immune system) by creating antibodies. Our antibodies “remember” germs when they get into our body and start our immune response to fight off the germ. Without a vaccine, it takes your immune system more than a week to fight off a germ. Some germs are so strong that the week to make the antibody is not enough and you can get very sick. However when you have the vaccine, your body is able to fend these germs off right away, and this makes a huge difference in defeating the germ quickly, without getting very sick.
What is booster shot?
Over time our body’s defense system forgets how to fight some of the germs you were vaccinated for. A booster shot helps your defense system relearn how to fight that germ.
Immunizations
Immunization is the process of becoming protected against an infection. There are two types of immunizations:
Passive
Passive Immunization gives your body premade defenses to protect you immediately when you are at a high risk of infection, but it only works for a short amount of time. For example, when you get a cut by a rusty piece of metal your doctor will give you a Tetanus shot.
Active
Active immunization enhances your body’s natural defense system by creating antibodies. Our antibodies “remember” germs when they get into our body and start our immune response to fight off the germ. Your annual flu vaccine is an example of this. 
Type of Vaccinations
Live-attenuated (weakened)
Live-attenuated vaccines uses a weakened form of a germ to create long lasting defense. Because the weakened germ looks like the regular germ, our body’s natural defenses make a strong and long-lasting response against the germ so we don’t get sick by the germ in the future. Talk to your doctor if you have a weakened immune system, an organ transplant, or other long term health conditions because your doctor may want to use a different type of vaccine instead. Your MMR and rotavirus vaccines are examples of this.
Inactivated 
Inactive vaccines use a dead version of a germ to create years of lasting defense. These vaccines are not as strong as a live-attenuated vaccine so you will need to get a few booster shots to keep your body’s defenses up.
Conjugate, Polysaccharide, Recombinant, and Subunit
Conjugate, Polysaccharide, Recombinant, and Subunit vaccines use a part of the germ to create years of lasting defense. These vaccines target a key part of the germ. Because of this, our body makes a strong defense and long lasting response so we don't get sick in the future. These vaccines need a few booster shots to keep your defense system ready. Your Meningococcal and Pneumococcal vaccines are examples of this.
Toxoid
Toxoid vaccines use inactivated toxins (scary parts made by germs) to generate defense against the part of the germ that causes the disease. This means your body’s defense will be against the toxin and not the germ. These vaccines need a few booster shots to keep your defense system ready. Your Diphtheria and Tetanus shot are an example of this.
What is in a Vaccine?
Every part of a vaccine serves a specific purpose. Each part of the vaccine has been tested by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be safe and effective. Vaccines are made up of:
Antigens
Antigens are the parts of the weakened or dead germ that cause disease. These antigens help your body’s defense system learn to defend you from the germ.
Adjuvants
Adjuvants are in some vaccines. They help your defense system make a stronger response to the vaccine.
Preservatives
Preservatives protect the vaccine from outside germs. Single dose vaccines do not have preservatives.
Stabilizers
Stabilizers help to keep the vaccine active while the vaccine is made, moved, and stored. 
Why should I get vaccinated?
Vaccines are both safe and effective. They help prevent scary diseases that can make you very sick. Vaccines can reduce the spread of disease, protect your health when you travel, save money from hospital visits, and above all, save lives.
What is herd/community immunity?
You getting vaccinated can protect both you and your community. This is known as herd/community immunity. When enough people are vaccinated against certain germs, the germs have trouble spreading from person to person, making the entire community less likely to get sick. Herd/community immunity protects everyone, but it especially is needed to protect the people who can’t get vaccines, like those with serious allergies or weakened immune systems.
What are the side effects of a Vaccine?
Vaccines may cause some mild side effects including; pain or swelling at the injection site, mild fever, chills, tiredness, a headache, and muscle/joint aches. Most of these side effects are actually your defense system working to give you protection from germs.
Vaccine Schedule
There are over a dozen vaccines that are recommended at different times throughout your life. Ask your doctor to learn more about when you should get vaccinated for each germ.
Childhood Vaccines 
Vaccines are the best way to prevent some really scary disease.Vaccinations begin in childhood and continue throughout adulthood. Look below to see descriptions of each of the childhood vaccines:
Chickenpox (Varicella) 
Chickenpox was once a common disease in the United States. It is caused by the virus, Varicella. The chickenpox virus stays quiet in your body (what your doctor would call latent) and can reactivate to cause Shingles later in life (luckily there is a vaccine for that). Shingles can cause a very painful rash and blisters. The Chickenpox pox vaccine is a live-attenuated vaccine. Vaccination for chickenpox is the best way to reduce your risk of getting both chickenpox and shingles.
DTaP (Diphtheria, Tetanus, and acellular Pertussis)
Diphtheria, Tetanus (lockjaw), and Pertussis (whooping cough) are three scary bacterial diseases that cause serious diseases including paralysis, lung disease, and even death. Although these diseases are rare in the United States, they are still lurking in the shadows. The Diphtheria and Tetanus parts of the vaccine are toxoid vaccines and the Pertussis part is a Conjugate, Polysaccharide, Recombinant, and Subunit type of vaccine. Vaccination for Diphtheria, Tetanus, and Pertussis can decrease the risk of developing one of these serious diseases for both you and your community.
Flu (Influenza) Once a Year
The Flu (influenza) affects millions of people every year. Although for many people the flu causes mild symptoms, it can cause serious lung disease and other health complications in the young and the elderly. Getting your flu shot every year is the best way to reduce your risk of getting the flu and to protect the community around you.
Hepatitis A (Hep A)
Hepatitis A, caused by a virus, is no longer a common liver disease in the United States, but is still common in many other countries. The Hepatitis A vaccine is an inactivated type of vaccine. Vaccination for Hepatitis A can decrease the risk of developing serious liver disease caused by the virus for both you and your community. 
Hepatitis B (Hep B)
Hepatitis B is a common liver disease caused by a virus. The Hepatitis B vaccine is a Conjugate, Polysaccharide, Recombinant, and Subunit type of vaccine. Vaccination for Hepatitis B can decrease your risk of developing serious liver disease caused by Hepatitis B for both you and your community.
HiB (Haemophilus influenzae)
HiB was once a common serious disease in infants and young children that caused infections of the lungs and brain. The infections can be deadly. Although this disease sounds like the common flu, it is actually different and can cause serious health problems for your child. The HiB is a Conjugate, Polysaccharide, Recombinant, and Subunit vaccine. Since Vaccinations for HiB began in the 1990s, HiB rates have plummeted across the United States; the vaccination is the best way to protect your child from HiB.
HPV (Gardisil)
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) is a very common viral disease in the United States that can cause genital warts and both reproductive and throat cancer. Luckily the vaccine has been shown to be very effective in preventing cancer and other health conditions caused by HPV. The HPV vaccine is a subunit vaccine that is recommended for children and adults to prevent both HPV and cancer caused by HPV.  
Inactivated Poliovirus
Poliovirus was once a common serious disease in the United States that caused brain infection and paralysis. Poliovirus vaccine is an inactivated type of vaccine. The poliovirus vaccine is the best way to protect yourself from polio. 
Meningococcal (MenACWY)
Meningococcal disease is a scary bacterial infection of the covering of the brain. Meningococcal disease can become dangerous very fast and become deadly. The MenACWY is a conjugate vaccine that covers four strains of the bacteria (Neisseria Meningitidis). Vaccination for Meningococcal disease is the best way to reduce your risk for a meningococcal infection. 
Meningococcal B (MenB)
Meningococcal disease is a scary bacterial infection of the covering of the brain. Meningococcal disease can become dangerous very fast and become deadly. The MenB is a conjugate vaccine that covers one strain of the bacteria (Neisseria Meningitidis) for people with certain health conditions and for certain areas of outbreaks (increased amounts of people getting sick). Vaccination for Meningococcal disease is the best way to reduce your risk for a meningococcal infection. 
MMR (Measles, Mumps, and Rubella)
Measles, Mumps, and Rubella are three scary and very contagious diseases caused by viruses. They can cause brain damage and hearing loss, and can cause a pregnant woman to lose her baby. Although these diseases are not common, they are lurking in the shadows. If you are not vaccinated, they can easily spread to you. The MMR vaccine is a live-attenuated vaccine. Vaccination for MMR is the best way to prevent getting Measles, Mumps, or Rubella.
Pneumococcal Conjugate (PVC13 - 13 different strains)
Pneumococcal disease causes lung disease in both children and adults. Although it is more common in children, it is more likely to cause serious disease in adults. The Pneumococcal Conjugate vaccine is a conjugate vaccine that covers 13 different strains of the bacteria (Streptococcus Pneumoniae). Vaccination with the Pneumococcal conjugate can decrease your risk of a pneumococcal infection.
Pneumococcal Polysaccharide (PPSV23 - 23 Different strains)
Pneumococcal disease causes lung disease in both children and adults. Although it is more common in children, it is more likely to cause serious disease in adults. The Pneumococcal Polysaccharide vaccine covers 23 different strains of the bacteria Streptococcus Pneumoniae. Vaccination with the Pneumococcal conjugate can decrease your risk of a pneumococcal infection.
Rotavirus
Rotavirus is a common contagious disease in babies and young children that can cause severe diarrhea, stomach pain, and dehydration. The Rotavirus vaccine is taken orally and is a live-attenuated vaccine. Vaccination for rotavirus can decrease the risk of developing a serious rotavirus infection in both your child and community.
TDaP (Tetanus, Diphtheria, and acellular Pertussis)
TDaP is your booster shot for the DTaP vaccine for Diphtheria, Tetanus (lockjaw), and Pertussis (whooping cough), which are three scary bacterial diseases that cause serious disease including paralysis, lung disease, and even death. Although these diseases are rare in the United States, they are still lurking in the shadows. The Diphtheria and Tetanus part of the vaccine are toxoid vaccines and the Pertussis part is a Conjugate, Polysaccharide, Recombinant, and Subunit type of vaccine. Vaccination for Diphtheria, Tetanus, and Pertussis can decrease the risk of developing one of these serious diseases for both you and your community. 
Adult Vaccines 
Vaccines are the best way to prevent some really scary diseases. Although it may feel like you had plenty of shots as a child, it is important to keep getting your adult vaccines. Look below to learn more about the adult vaccines:
Flu (Influenza) - Once a year
The Flu (influenza) affects millions of people every year. Although for many people the flu involves mild symptoms, it can cause serious lung disease and other health complications in the young and the elderly. Getting your flu shot every year is the best way reduce your risk of getting the flu and to protect the community around you.
HPV (Gardisil)
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) is a very common viral disease in the United States that can cause genital warts and both reproductive and throat cancer. Luckily the vaccine has been shown to be very effective in preventing cancer and other health conditions caused by HPV. The HPV vaccine is a subunit vaccine that is recommended for children and adults to prevent both HPV and cancer caused by HPV.
Pneumococcal (65+) (PCV13 first and at least one year later PPSV23)
Pneumococcal disease causes lung disease in both children and adults. Although it is more common in children, it is more likely to cause serious disease in adults and seniors. After the age of 65 you should receive the Pneumococcal Conjugate vaccine that covers 13 different strains of bacteria (Streptococcus Pneumoniae) and at least one year later receive the Pneumococcal Polysaccharide vaccine covers 23 different strains of the bacteria Streptococcus Pneumoniae. Vaccination with the Pneumococcal conjugate can decrease your risk of a pneumococcal infection.
Shingles (Zoster) - Over the age of 50
Shingles is a common disease caused by the same virus as the chickenpox. It causes painful rashes and blisters, and other serious health problems. If you had chickenpox as a kid, you are at a higher risk of developing shingles; luckily there a vaccine for this. The shingles vaccine is a subunit type of vaccine. Vaccination for Shingles is the best way to reduce your risk of developing it.
TDaP
TDaP is your booster shot for the DTaP vaccine for Diphtheria, Tetanus (lockjaw), and Pertussis (whooping cough), which are three scary bacterial diseases. They cause serious disease including paralysis, lung disease, and even death. Although these diseases are rare in the United States, they are still lurking in the shadows. The Diphtheria and Tetanus parts of the vaccine are toxoid vaccines and the Pertussis part is a Conjugate, Polysaccharide, Recombinant, and Subunit type of vaccine. Vaccination for Diphtheria, Tetanus, and Pertussis can decrease the risk of developing one of these serious diseases for both you and your community. 
Travel Vaccines 
Vaccines are the best way to prevent some scary diseases, and if you are traveling outside of your home country you may not be vaccinated for common diseases in your country of destination. Look below to learn more about the travel vaccines:
 Anthrax
Anthrax is a serious bacterial infection that can cause body aches, swelling, nausea, and vomiting. Anthrax is commonly found in the soil in agricultural areas  (farms). If you are traveling to an area with Anthrax, the Anthrax vaccine is the best way to prevent getting an Anthrax infection.
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis A, caused by a virus, is no longer a common liver disease in the United States, but is still common in many other countries. The Hepatitis A vaccine is an inactivated type of vaccine. Vaccination for Hepatitis A can decrease the risk of developing serious liver disease caused by the virus for both you and your community.
Japanese Encephalitis (JE)
Japanese Encephalitis is a disease not found in the United States, but is common in Asia. Japanese Encephalitis is a virus that can cause a scary brain infection. The JE vaccine is recommended for anyone traveling to Asia and is the best way to prevent Japanese Encephalitis.
Polio
Poliovirus was once a common serious disease in the United States that caused brain infection and paralysis. If you are traveling to a region where Polio is common, you should get the vaccine. Poliovirus vaccine is an inactivated type of vaccine. The poliovirus vaccine is the best way to protect yourself from polio. 
Rabies
Rabies is a very scary disease caused by a virus. Humans can get it from bites from infected animals like dogs, bats, and raccoons. Rabies can cause weakness, discomfort, burning sensation, delirium, and death. If you are traveling to an area with Rabies, the Rabies vaccine is the best way to prevent the disease. 
Twinrix Vaccine (Hepatitis A and B Vaccine)
Hepatitis A and B, caused by a virus, are no longer causes of common liver disease in the United States, but are still common in many other countries.  The Hepatitis A and B vaccine is an inactivated type of vaccine. Vaccination for Hepatitis A and B can decrease your risk of developing serious liver disease caused by Hepatitis A and B.
Typhoid Fever
Typhoid Fever is a rare disease in the United States, but is more common in other countries. Typhoid Fever can cause a high fever that can last for weeks and can be deadly. The Typhoid vaccine is available orally (live-attenuated vaccine)  or as a shot (inactivated vaccine). The Typhoid Vaccine is the best way to decrease your chance of getting Typhoid Fever. 
Yellow Fever
Yellow Fever is a disease not found in the United States, but is common in tropical countries. Yellow Fever can cause some serious complications including organ failure and bleeding. The Yellow Fever vaccine is a live-attenuated vaccine. Vaccination for Yellow Fever is the best way to prevent getting Yellow Fever. 

Questions to Ask your Doctor
You finish answering what feels like 100s of questions, and have had lights shined in your eyes and ears, a cold stethoscope on your back and chest, and had all of your reflexes checked. Maybe you had a few blood tests, imaging studies, and screening tests done. Now it's time for you to ask your doctor your questions. Your doctor is here to answer all of your questions. Your doctor should ask you if you understand what is going on with your health, and if your doctor doesn’t ask, don’t be afraid to ask your doctor questions. The best way for you to be healthy is when all of your questions about your health are answered. Below are some questions that you can ask your doctor:
Can you explain my medical condition more?
Can you point me to resources for my medical condition?
What may have caused it?
Is it permanent?
How do we treat this condition?
How can I prevent this from happening again?
Are there any clinical trials for my medical condition?
Is there anything I need to avoid with my medical condition?
Will my medical condition require any changes to my normal routine?
What steps should I take to prevent my medical condition from getting worse?
Is there a risk for this spreading to my family and friends?
What steps can I take to stop the spread to my friends and family?
How long will it take to get better or for my symptoms to go away?
What are my treatment options?
How long will I need to be treated?
How often will I need to take my medicine?
What are the side effects of my treatment?
What happens if I miss a dose?
What will happen if I stop taking it?
What is the standard treatment?
How much will the treatment cost?
If my insurance won’t pay for treatment, are there alternatives?
Can you explain to me the lab or test you ordered?
How soon do I need to get this test?
How will I find out about the results?
Where will I find the results?
What is the test used for?
Are there any risks to this?
How do I prepare for the test or lab?
Are the tests and labs being ordered being sent to places that accept my insurance?
Can you explain the procedure you want me to get?
How soon do I need to get this procedure?
Are there any risks to this?
How do I prepare for this procedure?
Is this procedure going to be accepted my insurance?
When do I need to see a doctor again?
What should I do before my next visit?
How many other doctors would I need to see?
Who do I follow up with for any questions I have?
Are there any support groups near me for my medical condition/treatment?
What are some ways that I can improve my health?
Can you point me to websites/apps/products that can track my health?
What should and shouldn’t I be eating?
Can you point me to resources to help me limit my smoking?
Can you point me to resources to help me limit my alcohol use?
What are my options for getting insurance?
Who can I talk to about getting treatment without insurance?

Common Medical Words
Medicine is filled with a lot of big words, and we are here to break them down for you in language that is easy to understand. 
Common health conditions- each definition is a very simplified description of a common disease and does not discuss all the symptoms, causes, and treatment options. Since many conditions have similar symptoms, if you are worrying about something, talk to your doctor. This list is not does not cover all diseases and should not be used to self-diagnose. (or something like that, don’t use this to diagnose or something. I also don’t want to scare people with these) 
Differential Diagnosis (this is first then alphabetical)
The Differential Diagnosis is a list your doctor creates, containing things they think are possible diagnoses. Your doctor will rank this list based on what is most likely and least likely. Your doctor uses your history, physical exam, labs, and tests to determine the correct diagnosis from this list. It is a dynamic list, meaning that as the doctor finds out more information from the history and physical exam, some diagnoses go higher up on the list, while others go lower. After doing labs and tests, it is possible to narrow the diagnoses down or to rule out more serious possibilities.  
Allergy
When your defense system reacts to something unexpectedly. You can be allergic to all sorts of things from food (peanuts, shellfish) or to products like latex. Seasonal allergies can cause itchy, red eyes and a runny or stuffy nose. Allergic reactions can cause rashes (hives) and possibly shock (severe changes as your body tries to work properly while in distress). You might feel like your throat is closing and find it difficult to breathe.
a)    Alzheimer's
-usually seen in the elderly, this shows up as difficulty remembering simple things and affects your ability to do normal tasks over time. 
b)     Amyloidosis
-amyloid is a specific type of protein that can travel in your body and deposit, or rest, in various organs. When it does this, it can damage those organs. 
c)     Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)
-ALS causes problems with the nerve cells that control your muscle, so there is slow and increasing muscle weakness which spreads. It is usually referred to as Lou Gehrig’s disease. 
d)     Anemia
 - Decreased Red Blood Cells or decreased hemoglobin. There are many types.
e)     Aneurysm
    -this is when your artery gets big, just like a balloon. Just how the walls of a balloon get thinner as it gets bigger, the artery walls also get thinner, making this concerning for doctors. 
f)       Anxiety
    -intense period of stress or worry, usually before an important thing, like right before an exam or presentation, 
g)     Asthma
Condition marked by difficulty breathing, triggered by dust, exercise, or other allergens (things that irritate your immune system)
h)     Atherosclerosis
    -gunky (plaque) buildup on the inner walls of your arteries. This causes them to be less flexible and more rigid, like a lead pipe. 
i)       Benign Prostate Hyperplasia (BPH)
    -benign things are NOT cancerous. BPH is when the prostate (male anatomy) gets big and can press down on the path your pee takes to exit your body, making it hard to pee. Doctors can check for this during the prostate exam. (link to prostate exam in common screening) 
j)       Benign Tumor
    -benign means that the tumor is NOT cancerous. It is just a clump of cells that should not be there. 
k)     Cancer
    -usually described as malignant, or bad, cancer occurs when cells ignore what they are normally supposed to do and start rebelling. They keep growing and try to steal all the local oxygen and nutrients for themselves. 
l)       Cataract
    -this occurs in the eyes, when the lens of the eye becomes cloudy, making it hard to see clearly. It is somewhat similar to when glasses slightly fog up and everything gets blurry. 
m)   Chronic Bronchitis
    -bronchioles are the branch like pathways air travels in inside the lung, and -itis means inflammation. Chronic bronchitis is long term inflammation of the bronchioles, making it harder to breathe. A very common cause is smoking. 
n)     Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
    -usually a combination of chronic bronchitis (see above) and emphysema (see below), making it difficult to breathe even when resting. The most common cause is smoking. 
o)      Cirrosis
    -long term liver damage and scarring, meaning the liver does not work properly. Damage can’t be reversed. 
p)   Congestive Heart Failure (CHF)
When the heart can’t pump fluid out properly, the fluid builds up in the heart and can cause swelling and other problems. This is something that can be discovered in the physical exam (link to heart part of physical) when listening to the heart and looking at the arms and legs. 
q)     Coronary Artery Disease (CAD)
This is when there are a lot of atherosclerotic (gunky plaque) arteries all over, making arteries hard, narrow, and rigid. This can lead to a heart attack. 
r)      Depression
    -a combination of decreased: sleep, energy, interest, concentration, and/or appetite, and a feeling of guilt. It is usually associated with thoughts of death. If you are contemplating suicide, please consider calling the suicide prevention lifeline: 1-800-273-8255
    - to find out more, check out this website: https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/
s)     Diabetes
There are two main types of diabetes. Juvenile diabetes (Type 1) is usually diagnosed earlier. It is when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin, the hormone used to control sugar (glucose) levels. 
Type 2 diabetes usually shows up later. This is when your cells don’t respond to insulin, so it can’t work properly. 
Symptoms include: polyuria (need to pee more), polydipsia (increased thirst), and polyphagia (want to eat a lot)
Hyperglycemia - Too much sugar (glucose) in the blood
Hypoglycemia - Not enough sugar (glucose) in the blood
t)       Eczema
Inflammation of the skin, causing itchiness, dryness, redness, and scaliness. It is usually seen in kids
u)     Emphysema
It is usually seen in smokers. The alveoli of the lungs are like little grapes. This is where the oxygen in the air you breathe in transfers to the red blood cells. In this condition, the alveoli look like little balloons instead of grapes and don’t work well 
v)     Fracture
A break or crack in the bone 
Closed fracture: the bone is broken but stays inside your body
Open fracture: the bone is broken and sticks out of your skin. This is slightly more dangerous because of exposure to the outside world. There is a higher chance of infection with open fractures than with closed fractures. 
w)    Glaucoma
    -high pressure in the eye. This is checked at the eye doctor’s. It can be dangerous and can lead to vision loss
x)     Gout
A type of arthritis where mineral crystals build up in joints and cause severe redness and pain
y)     Heartburn
Uncomfortable feeling in your chest because of the acid in your stomach going up to your esophagus, the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. Usually happens after meals
z)     Hematoma
Blood leakage outside of vessels and into the surrounding space (should not be there). It is like a bruise but involves more blood. 
aa)  Hemophilia
There are a few different types, but all of them cause difficulty clotting blood. This means that even a small cut can be dangerous and cause a person to lose a lot of blood
bb)  Hemorrhage
Massive bleeding and blood loss. Blood can leave your body or buildup in places it shouldn’t be 
cc)  Hyperlipidemia
A very high number of fatty acids (like LDL Cholesterol) in your blood. This is commonly just called high cholesterol
dd)  Hypertension
This is a fancier way of saying high blood pressure
ee)  Hyperthyroidism
This is when your thyroid levels get too high. It can cause increased metabolism (quicker energy use), fast heart rate, tiredness, and other issues.
ff) Hypothyroidism
The opposite of hyperthyroidism, this is when thyroid levels in your blood get too low. You might notice a lot of weight gain (low metabolism), slow heart rate, tiredness, weakness, and other problems. 
gg)  Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Long term inflammation of parts of the digestive tract causing pain, tiredness, and diarrhea
hh)  Insomnia
Long term issues falling and staying asleep
ii)  Lupus
This is a disease that occurs when the body’s immune system fights its own cells. Signs can show up anywhere, including a rash on the face or skin, arthritis, and seizures. 
jj) Malignant Tumor
This is another way of describing  a tumor (mass of cells) as cancerous
kk)  Meniere's disease
Disease in the inner part of the ear that causes sudden periods of severe dizziness, difficulty hearing, and hearing loss
ll)  Migraine
Severe, throbbing headache on one side of the head. It might also be hard to look at lights. Resting in a quiet, dark room can help. 
mm)  Multiple Sclerosis
The body’s immune system attacks the lining of nerve cells randomly, causing different symptoms in different areas of the body. The problems are not always present. Symptoms can completely or mostly go away and then different symptoms can show up months later. 
nn)  Myasthenia Gravis
This disease also is because of the immune system attacking the body’s own cells. People usually feel muscle weakness and difficulty with movements as the day goes on. 
oo)  Myocardial Infarction (Heart Attack)
A myocardial infarction is the fancy term for a heart attack. It is when part of the heart tissue dies because it doesn’t get oxygen. 
pp)  Narcolepsy
This is a long term condition where a person is constantly sleepy and can suddenly fall asleep. It can be dangerous, especially if the person falls asleep while driving. 
qq)  Osteoporosis
Osteo means bone: this disorder affects bone strength. The bones become more porous (more holes), meaning they become weaker. Bones can break more easily. 
rr)    Parkinson’s
    -this disease is degenerative, meaning it gets worse as time goes on. It slowly causes difficulty moving, tremors, and slurred speech. 
ss)  Pneumothorax
Air in the space between the front wall of your chest and your lung. It causes an increase in pressure in that area and pushes down on your lung, causing it to collapse (deflate).
tt)     Polycythemia 
Too many red blood cells and increased hematocrit
uu)  Psoriasis
Condition in which skin cells develop very quickly and buildup on the top layer (surface) of skin. The buildup leads to scaly, itchy, painful areas of skin. Skin can look silvery in this condition. 
vv)  Pulmonary Embolism
A blood clot that blocks blood flow to the lungs, causing difficulty breathing. 
ww) Pulmonary Fibrosis
This is when the lung gets scars, making it to hard take a deep breath. The scars can’t expand well, so when they cover the surface of the lung, the lung can’t get as big as it normally would. 
xx)  Raynaud’s Phenomenon
This is when cold air causes blood flow to fingertips, toes, the nose, and the tips of ears to cut off, leading to pain and a blue or white color. 
yy)  Reflux
This is when acid from the stomach goes up the esophagus, causing burning. This is usually what happens when someone has heart burn. 
zz)  Regurgitation
This is a fancy way of saying vomit or throw up 
aaa)  Rheumatoid Arthritis
The immune system attacks the body, causing long term inflammation of joints all over the body.
bbb) Sarcoidosis
The immune system gets triggered by something and tries to contain it, causing small little deposits all around the body. The deposits are usually seen in the lungs. The deposits can eventually cause scarring of tissue. 
ccc)  Seizure
Uncontrolled jerking (tonic clonic seizure) because of a sudden burst of electrical energy in the brain.
ddd) Sleep Apnea
Blockage in airway (like the tongue) while sleeping, causing snoring.
eee)  Sprain
Twisted ligament, making it difficult to move the affected/attached muscles
fff)   Stenosis
This means narrowing, usually referring to narrowing and hardening of arteries. However, this term can apply to many vessels and structures in the body.
ggg) Stress headache
Also referred to a tension headache, it is triggered by stress. It is usually steady, bandlike pain across the forehead on both sides. 
hhh) Stroke- if you think someone is having a stroke, call 9-1-1 immediately. Visit www.stroke.org for more information
This is when your brain does not get enough blood and therefore oxygen, either because there is a clot or a bleed in the area. 
How to tell if someone is having a stroke: act FAST
Facial drooping on one side (ask the person to smile, and one side won’t curve up) 
Arms (ask the person to raise both arms- one will fall back down)
Speech (ask the person to repeat a sentence you say- their speech will slur or seem weird)
Time (timing is important for a good outcome- call 9-1-1 immediately!)
iii)    Ulcer
A painful, open wound on the skin or inside your digestive tract
jjj)    Vertigo
Dizziness and problems with balance


Germs
Abscess
Swollen area filled with pus. This is caused by the cells of your immune system trying to contain the bacteria in the area. The area will be warm, red, and painful. 
Antibiotic
Medication used to treat a bacterial infection and selected based on the kind of bacteria (germ) that is causing the infection. It does NOT work for viral infections like the common flu 
Antifungal
Medication used to treat fungal infections, like athlete’s foot
Antihelminthic
Medication used to treat parasitic infections, like worm infections
Antiviral
Class of medication used to treat some viral infections, like HIV, herpes, and influenza
Bacteremia
The presence of bacteria in the blood
Bacteria
Germs that can infect the body but are also sometimes naturally part of you. For example, a bacteria called Staph. Epidermidis is usually on your skin and causes no problems. However, it can cause infections if it gets inside your body. 
Drug Resistance
When bacteria do not stop growing or do not die when antibiotics are given. This is because the bacteria know how to fight back against the antibiotic. That specific bacteria might not have what the antibiotic targets and can continue to replicate in your body. One of the reasons it is important to finish the full course of antibiotics even if you feel better is because there will usually be some bacteria left near the end of your course. If you don’t finish the course, those bacteria can sit around and replicate. And now that they already know how the antibiotic works, it is easier for them to fight and defeat the antibiotic the next time around. 
Microbiology 
The study of all the tiny things that can infect us, like bacteria, fungi, viruses, parasites, and worms. 
Microbiologist
Someone who intensively studies the field of microbiology and is skilled at figuring out the specific type of germ from any given sample. 
Fungus
A kingdom of organisms that vary widely. They can be edible (like the mushrooms that come on your pizza or in your Chinese takeout), poisonous, or infectious (like the ones that cause Athlete’s foot). 
Impetigo
Characterized by red sores that start oozing and get crusty. This is mainly seen in children and is caused by a very infectious (easily spreadable) bacteria. 
Parasite
An organism that can infect humans and steal the person’s energy and resources for itself 
Helminth
A large, worm like parasite that can be seen with the naked eye, unlike other germs that are very small. An example is a tapeworm.
Amoeba 
A type of organism that can easily change its shape. It can be a normal part of the body but can also be infectious and cause severe stomach upset (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea). 
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is when a germ gets into your lungs and makes you sick.
Prion
A prion is a small protein that can cause disease, like in Mad Cows Disease.
Sepsis
 Sepsis is your body’s response when your body is fighting a very strong infection. Your body releases its defenses into your bloodstream to fight off the infection and this causes damages to other body parts. 
STI (Sexually Transmitted Infection)
A STI is an infection from sexual contact that has not caused symptoms or disease. 
STD (Sexually Transmitted Disease)
A STD is an infection from sexual contact that causes symptoms and disease. 
URI (Upper Respiratory Infection)
A URI is an infection in your sinuses, throat, pharynx, larynx, epiglottis and trachea. These infections causes sinusitis, pharyngitis, laryngitis, epiglottitis, and tracheitis.
UTI (Urinary Tract Infection)
A Urinary Tract Infection is an infection of your urethra (the tube your pee comes out of), bladder, ureters (tube from kidney to bladder), or kidney. These infections cause Urethritis (urethra), cystitis (bladder), ureteritis (ureter), and pyelonephritis (kidney).
Vaccine
A vaccine is made from very weak or dead germs that help create our body’s defenses to fight those nasty bacteria, viruses, and toxins. 
Viremia
Presence of Viruses in the blood.
Virus
A virus is an infectious agent that can only grow and replicate inside of your cells. The flu (Influenza virus) is and example.
Electrolytes - Salts in your body
-calcemia
 calcium
-chloremia
chloride
Hyper
means high
Hypo
means low
-kalemia
potassium
-natremia
sodium
-Phosphatemia
phosphate
-Magnesemia
magnesium
The “-itis,” or swelling/inflammation/infection
Appendicitis
Inflammation/infection of the appendix
Arthritis
Inflammation/infection of the joints
Bronchitis
Inflammation/infection of the bronchi (part of the airway)
Bursitis 
Inflammation/infection of the fluid filled sacs at joints
Carditis 
Inflammation/infection of your heart
Conjunctivitis
Inflammation/infection of the mucous (moist) membrane of the eye. Commonly referred to as pink eye.
Cellulitis 
Inflammation/infection of your skin
Cholecystitis 
Inflammation/infection of the gallbladder
Colitis 
Inflammation/infection of your colon 
Cystitis
Inflammation/infection of your bladder
Encephalitis
Inflammation/infection of the brain, usually caused by a virus
Epiglottitis
Inflammation/infection of your epiglottis (flap at the base of your tongue/ top of your airway that stops food/liquid from going into your lungs)
Hepatitis
Inflammation/infection of the liver
Gastritis
Inflammation/infection of the stomach
Laryngitis
Inflammation/infection of the larynx (where your voice box is)
Meningitis
Inflammation/irritation/infection of the lining of the brain and spinal cord. This can be because of germs, extra fluid, or bleeds
Pericarditis 
Inflammation/infection of the covering of your heart
Pharyngitis 
Inflammation/Infection of your Pharynx (behind the nose and mouth)
Pyelonephritis
Inflammation/Infection of your kidney.
Sinusitis
Inflammation/infection of the sinuses of the face. This causes drainage issues and can cause headaches
Tendonitis 
Inflammation/infection of the tendons (connect muscle to bone)
Tonsillitis
Inflammation/infection of the tonsils, usually because of infection
Tracheitis
Inflammation/infection of the trachea (windpipe)
Ureteritis 
Inflammation/infection of the ureter (tube from kidney to bladder)
Urethritis 
Inflammation/infection of urethra (tube from bladder that you pee out of)
Vasculitis
Inflammation/infection of blood vessels
Types of Doctors (Medical Specialities)
Anesthesiologist
These doctors usually are present when you need a surgeon. They can numb an area or sedate you so you don’t feel pain during procedures.
Cardiologist
These doctors specialize in the heart and blood vessels.
Dermatologist
These doctors focus on skin. They can help people with acne, help drain larger bumps on/under your skin, and detect/treat skin cancer. A famous dermatologist you might know is known as “Dr. Pimple Popper.”
Emergency Medicine (EM) doctor
The emergency medicine doctor is the one you will see in the Emergency Department of the hospital. They treat more severe, sudden problems you might have
Gastroenterologist
These doctors focus on your digestive tract
General practitioner/primary care physician (PCP)
Your general practitioner is your PCP. For most problems, you will first go to your PCP and if they think the problem is more serious, needs more focused evaluation and care, or is something that needs to be explored more, they will refer you to the proper specialist. For the most part, your GP will be able to help you with any problems you have. 
Geneticist
These doctors specialize in hereditary disorders, or disorders that can pass down from parent to child
Geriatrician
These doctors specifically work with older adults. 
Immunologist
These doctors specialize in immune (defense) system mediated diseases like allergies, asthma, and HIV/AIDS. 
Internist
These doctors specialize in diagnosing and treating adults.
Nephrologist
These doctors focus on your kidneys.
Neurologist
These doctors specialize in the nervous system (brain, spinal cord, nerves) and its disorders. They can do a much more extensive version of the neurological exam mentioned in the physical exam section. 
OB/GYN (Obstetrician/Gynecologist)
These doctors specialize in female reproductive health, as well as pregnancy. They are the go-to doctors for specialized female reproductive care and pregnancy. 
Ophthalmologist
These doctors specialize in eyes and can do certain eye surgeries as well. 
Oncologist
These doctors specialize in cancer. It can be scary being referred to an oncologist. You might be referred if anything seems suspicious and an expert opinion is needed. 
Otorhinolaryngologist (ENT)
This is a huge word that is hard to say, so it is usually abbreviated as ENT, or ears, nose, throat. 
Oto- means ear; rhino- means nose; laryngo- refers to your larynx (involves your throat and vocal cords)
This type of doctor specializes in ears, nose, and throat. You would be referred to an ENT if there are specific problems in those areas that might need more specialized care. They can do a lot more specific procedures in this area than your family doctor. 
Palliative
This type of doctor focuses on end of life care that reduces the suffering of patients with serious diseases. 
Pathologist
Pathologists are the behind the scene heroes. They inspect tissue samples from biopsies, any cultures, blood work, and much more and can confirm a diagnosis!
Pediatrician 
These doctors specifically work with kids, usually until they are 18-21 years old. 
Pulmonologist 
These doctors have focused training on the lungs and airways.
Psychiatrist
This type of doctor focuses on your mental health and symptoms that occur alongside changes in mental health. 
Radiologist
Radiologists often work behind the scenes and are the ones who can conduct imaging studies and interpret the results. They specialize in being able to identify even the smallest issues!
Rheumatologist 
These doctors specialize in immune system caused problems to the joints, muscles, connective tissue, and more.
Surgeon
These are the doctors that specialize in any procedures that involve invasive procedures (either small or large cuts to access something inside your body)
Urologist
These doctors specialize in the urinary tract system (how you pee) and the male reproductive system
Other Healthcare Providers
Dentist
A Dentist is a highly educated and trained person who is an expert in teeth and gums. Your teeth and gums are very important to your health. Even your heart can be affected by your dental health.
Dietiation
A Dietician is a highly educated and trained person who helps with day to day food intake.
Nurse (RN)
A nurse is a highly educated and trained person who is a major part of your healthcare team. Nurses have a lot of different roles depending on the setting they work in, including performing physical exams, taking vitals, performing blood draws, and doing patient education. 
Nurse Practitioner (NP)
A Nurse Practitioner is a highly educated and trained person who is initially trained as a nurse and then receives further education. An NP is also able to diagnose and treat health conditions.
Nutritionist
A nutritionist is a highly educated and trained person who is an expert on food and how it can impact your health.
Occupational Therapist (OT)
An Occupational Therapist is a highly educated and and trained individual who helps people regain strength and movement for their day to day activities like handwriting skills.
Optometrist
An Optometrist is a highly educated and trained person who is trained to look at your eyes and vision.
Phlebotomist
A Phlebotomist is a highly educated and trained person who draws your blood.
Physician Assistant (PA)
A Physician Assistant is a highly educated and trained person who is trained to diagnose and treat health conditions. A PA gets training similar to what a doctor gets. Typically Physicians Assistants work with doctors on your health care team.
Physical Therapist (PT)
A physical therapist is a highly educated and trained person who helps people regain strength and movement.
Social Worker
A social worker is a highly educated and trained person who helps  people cope with and problem solve day to day life.
Psychologist
A Psychologist is a highly educated and trained person who studies behavior, cognition (brain power), emotions, and social processes. Psychologists can be an important part of your healthcare team.

Vitals
Blood Pressure
Your blood pressure is one of the most important measurements your doctor takes. There are two numbers in blood pressure. Systolic is the top number, which is the pressure in your arteries when your heart contracts. The diastolic is the bottom number, which is the pressure in your arteries when your heart is relaxing. You can think of blood pressure as a car tire. The more air you pump into the tire (blood your heart pumps into your blood vessels), the higher pressure in the tire is. High air pressure in your tire can cause damage to the tire, just like how high blood pressure in your arteries can cause damage to your arteries and heart.
BMI
Your BMI or Body Max Index is your weight divided by your height and is used to determine if you are underweight (under 18.5), normal weight (between 18.5 and 24.9), overweight (Between 25 and 29.9), or obese (over 30).
Pulse (heart) Rate 
Your pulse or heart rate is another measurement that tells a lot about your health. A fast heart rate (Tachycardia) or a slow heart rate (bradycardia) can be related to different aspects of health. Your doctor may take your heart rate in multiple locations to see if it is the same on each side. The doctor will also be checking if the beat has a regular rate and is strong. 
Respiratory Rate
Your Respiratory Rate tells your doctor how fast or slow you are breathing.
Temperature
Your temperature is a measure of how warm or cold your body is.
Health Care Settings
Clinics
Clinics are non-hospital places where you can receive healthcare. There are many types of clinics, including some that are wage-based payments and some that are free.
Emergency Care
Emergency Care is also known as the ER. Emergency care is when you need immediate medical attention because the injury or medical illness is very serious or life-threatening. 
Inpatient
Inpatient means you are admitted (staying) in a hospital during treatment.
Outpatient
Outpatient means you are getting healthcare not at a hospital.
Home-care
Home-care is when you have trained professionals care for you in the comfort of your home. Home-care includes help with things such as bathing and getting dressed. 
Hospice 
Hospice is where you have trained healthcare workers treating patients who are terminally ill. Patients who are given six months or less to live are recommend to hospice. 
Hospital
A hospital is where you have many medical professionals working to treat patients. This includes both medical and surgical treatment.
Primary Care
Primary care is where you go to see your Primary Care Physician (PCP). For most problems, you will first go to your PCP and if they think the problem is more serious, needs more focused evaluation and care, or is something that needs to be explored more, they will refer you to the proper specialist. For the most part, your GP will be able to help you with any problems you have. 
Private Practice
A Private Practice is where doctors own the place they work at.
Urgent Care
Urgent Care may sound like emergency care, but it is different. Urgent care is a walk-in clinic that provides care for injuries or medical illnesses that are not life-threatening and not as serious as emergency care. 
Veterans Affair (VA) System
The VA System offers medical care to Veterans of the United States military.
Tools Used in Physical Exam
Blood Pressure Cuff
A Blood Pressure Cuff is used to measure your blood pressure. The cuff gets inflated and then slowly released while the doctor listens with a stethoscope. Using the cuff and the stethoscope, the doctor can determine your blood pressure. High or low blood pressures can be troublesome, and the doctor might take more steps depending on the values. 
Cotton Tip Applicator
A Cotton Tip Applicator is a fancy word for a Q-tip. It is a stick with cotton on it. They may be used to test your sensation or spread a gel on your skin. 
Ophthalmoscope
An Ophthalmoscope is the device with round light used to look into your eye. With the Ophthalmoscope your doctor can see structures in your eye like the retina, macula, and optic disc. 
Otoscope
An Otoscope is a device with light used to look in your ear and nose.
Pen light
A pen light is a little flashlight used to check your eyes for what is known as the pupillary reflex.
Reflex Hammer
A reflex hammer looks like a hammer with a plastic triangular head. The reflex hammer is used to check your reflexes like the one at your knee.
Speculum
A speculum is a device used to open the vagina up to look at the cervix.
Stethoscope
 A Stethoscope is a device that you see doctors carry and wear all the time. A Stethoscope lets your doctor listen to your heart, lungs, and belly.
Thermometer
A Thermometer is a device used to take your body’s temperature.
Tongue Depressor
A tongue depressor looks like a wooden popsicle stick that is used during the “ahhh” part of the physical exam. The tongue depressor lets your doctor see some of the deeper parts of the throat.
Tuning fork
A tuning fork looks a metal U that vibrates. The tuning fork is used for detecting hearing loss. 
Anonymous Question Submission <- Chris to create submission form 
Doctors ask a lot of questions. Sometimes those questions seem endless and can feel like they come out of nowhere. If we didn’t include one of the questions your doctor asked you, let us know and we will gladly answer it.
Name (optional)
Question
Way to contact
Would you want us to post this to our website

Clinic Near me

Suggestions/Comments/Contact us
Doctors ask a lot of questions, perform the physical, and order a lot of tests, labs, and imaging studies. Our goal is to help you understand why your doctor does the things they do. If you have any suggestions or comments, please reach out to us with the form below!
Name (optional)
Comment/Suggestion
Way to contact (optional)

About
Dylan 
Hello! My name is Dylan and I am a second year medical student. I believe that the best way for us to be at our best health is when we understand and trust our doctors. Doctors ask so many questions, and do so many exams, labs, and tests that sometimes feel uncomfortable and a bit scary. That's why I set out to create Why Doctors Ask, a platform that can answer all of the whys behind what your doctor is asking you, physical exams, imaging tools, labs, screening tests, and to break down some of those complicated words that doctors use. I hope that WhyDoctorsAsk can help you feel a bit more at ease at your next doctor’s appointment.
“Nothing in life is to be feared, it is only to be understood. Now is the time to understand more, so that we may fear less." 
– Marie Curie
Chandni- 
Hi, my name is Chandni and I am a second year medical student. I think it is important for people to understand what is happening when they go in to the doctor’s office. Sometimes things can be confusing or not explained very well, and it can be frustrating not knowing what is going on. We realized there is not that much information out there on what actually happens during a doctor’s visit. Our goal is to lift a little bit of the mystery that surrounds a doctor’s visit and to make the process understandable for everyone. Former Surgeon General C Everett Koop once said, “There are all kinds of things you can do to marry literacy to health,” and that is what we are trying to accomplish. We want to make it easier for everyone to understand what the doctor is doing so each person is empowered and able to take his/her/their health into his/her/their own hands. 
Chris
HI! My name is Chris and I am a current Drexel University student studying Finance and Computer Science. Having spent numerous hours around medical professionals, I can understand why there is a great deal of confusion surrounding hospital visits. From the complicated insurance to the numerous questions that you are bombarded with upon your arrival, medical care can seem to be the last thing you want when you truly need it. That is why we have created this online collection of various resources regarding hospital and office visits, so that you can skip the confusion and move right on to getting better!
